
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Report title
Subtitle
Authors
China’s strategic petroleum reserve
as a geoeconomic tool
A ‘what if’ exercise
Ismael Arciniegas Rueda, Henri van Soest & Karishma V. Patel

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
For more information on this publication, visit www.rand.org/t/RRA5069-1
About RAND Europe
RAND Europe is a not-for-profit research organisation that helps improve policy and
decision making through research and analysis. To learn more about RAND Europe, visit
www.randeurope.org.
Research Integrity
Our mission to help improve policy and decision making through research and analysis is enabled
through our core values of quality and objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level
of integrity and ethical behaviour. To help ensure our research and analysis are rigorous, objective,
and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance
process; avoid both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through
staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory disclosure; and pursue transparency in our
research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings and
recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure
intellectual independence. For more information, visit www.rand.org/about/research-integrity.
RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
Published by the RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, Calif., and Cambridge, UK
© 2026 RAND Corporation
R® is a registered trademark.
Cover: Adobe Stock
Limited Print and Electronic Distribution Rights
This publication and trademark(s) contained herein are protected by law. This representation of
RAND intellectual property is provided for noncommercial use only. Unauthorised posting of this
publication online is prohibited; linking directly to its webpage on rand.org is encouraged.
Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse in another form, any of its research
products for commercial purposes. For information on reprint and reuse permissions, please visit
www.rand.org/pubs/permissions.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
1
1. About this report
China’s Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) was established in March 2004, with the aim of constructing
China’s first oil base to protect the country’s energy security.1 Since then, China’s SPR has evolved from a
small coastal network into a nationwide system of large -scale storage facilities combining central
government, commercial and provincial reserves. As of May 2026, the Chinese SPR is estimated to hold
between 1.1 and 1.4 billion barrels of oil, equivalent to around 110–140 days of net imports.2 The US SPR,
in comparison , currently comprises 413 million barrels, equivalent to approximately 125 days of net
imports.3 A key distinction between the two nations is the treatment of government- versus corporate-held
petroleum inventory. In China, the corporate-held inventory carries a mandate of state responsibility that
allows government intervention in a national emergency, effectively giving the government control over
both commercial and government reserves.
While the Chinese SPR is primarily designed to mitigate risks from oil supply chain disruptions, its size
compared to that of other countries could give China a large potential leverage on international energy
markets and, by extension, in the global economy. In other words, China’s SPR could evolve from an
economic policy device to a geoeconomic tool allowing the country to achieve goals such as
exercising
leverage on other nations, protect ing national security, influen cing alliances, punish ing adversaries and
affecting global supply chains .
The value of this leverage is likely to increase if reserve releases by International Energy Agency (IEA)
member states, such as the March 2026 release of 400 million barrel s of oil, fail to normalise volatility in
the oil markets,4 which is a possible outcome according to experts.5 Unlike the United States, China is not
a member of the IEA and before the 2026 Iran War , the combined SPR of the IEA member states and
China’s SPR were of comparable size.
Nevertheless, Chinese policy around the use of their SPR as a geoeconomic tool, particularly in crisis
scenarios, is not well understood. Although China has built its SPR as a resilience tool,
the size of the SPR
compared to other global oil reserves could give China the leverage to use it in a more strategic way .

1 Ministry of Ecology and Environment (PRC) (2007).
2 Meidan (2026); see also US Energy Information Administration (2026a).
3 International Energy Agency (IEA) (2026a).
4 International Energy Agency (IEA) (2026b). Volatility refers to sudden swings in oil prices in international markets. For
instance, since the beginning of the US-Iran war, the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil has fluctuated widely above and
below $100/barrel.
5 O’Brient (2026).

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
RAND Europe
2
This project investigates potential ways in which China could do so. Our analysis, however, does not explore
whether China actually intends to use SPR as a geo economic tool. Specifically, we are interested in
evaluating the four factors below:
• What does China’s SPR look like and how is it managed?
• Could China use its SPR to achieve geoeconomic effect?6
• Under what scenarios might China use its SPR as a geoeconomic tool?
• How should allied nations or partners respond to specific geoeconomic applications of China’s
SPR?
China Research Center
RAND Global and Emerging Risks is a division of RAND Corporation that delivers rigorous and objective
public policy research on the most consequential challenges to civilisation and global security. This work
was undertaken by the division’s China Research Center, which seeks to improve US, ally, and partner
policymaker and their publics’ understanding of the People’s Republic of China.
Funding
This research project was independently initiated and conducted within the China Research Center using
a gift from philanthropist Michael Tang, as well as gifts from other RAND supporters and income from
operations. RAND donors and grantors have no influence over research findings or recommendations.
Acknowledgement s
We thank the RAND China Research Center, and in particular Jude Blanchette for his support of this
project, as well as our QA reviewers Fiona Quimbre and Francesca Ghiretti for their insightful comments.

6 Geoeconomic effect involves using economic power to project influence and secure strategic interests. An example is the US
economic sanctions on Russia in 2022, which aimed to influence Russian strategic behaviour.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
3
2. Methodology
To answer the research questions set out above, we followed a mixed methods approach:
• Technical and policy assessment of China’s SPR. We used a short and targeted literature review
to generate a rapid evidence assessment to characterise the technical attributes of China’s SPR (e.g.
volume, stockpiling strategy, etc.) as well as the policy mechanisms that regulate its use.
• Rubric for evaluating China’s SPR potential for use as a geoeconomic tool. Based on a rapid
literature review, we identified the necessary attributes of a geoeconomic tool. These attributes were
then represented in a rubric which we used to assess the Chinese SPR’s geoeconomic potential.
• Vignette development . Using a Political Economic Social Technical Legal and Environmental
(PESTLE) classification,7 we identified six enabling drivers (which may encourage the use of the
SPR to further geoeconomic goals) and six restricting drivers (which may limit the use of the SPR
as a geoeconomic tool). We then drafted a longlist of eight vignettes outlining different ways in
which China could leverage its SPR, which we presented to a group of four RAND subject-matter
experts with a background in macroeconomics, China studies and international relations. In the
vignettes, we considered a time horizon of five years, which aligns with the principal cadence of
Chinese strategic planning. In practice, major priorities in energy security, industrial policy and
foreign economic strategy are articulated and operationali sed through China’s Five -Year Plans.
Based on the input of the subject-matter experts, we refined the longlist to three plausible vignettes
outlining how China may leverage its SPR.

7 Makos (2024).

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4
3. Understanding China’s SPR
3.1. Technical overview
Even though China’s SPR is relatively young compared to other oil reserves, it has rapidly expanded in size
and strategic reach. The overall concept of SPRs was originally established as a coordinated means to ensure
national security and economic stability during geopolitically induced supply shocks. Following the Arab
oil embargo (1973–4), the IEA mandated a 60 -day (later updated to 90 -day) net -import equivalent
stockpile for its member countries.8 Two decades later, after becoming a net importer of crude oil in 1993,
China started planning for its own 90-day SPR, without joining the IEA, as part of the long-term objectives
of its Ninth Five-year Plan in 1996.9
Today, China has the world’s largest SPR, estimated to have reached up to 1.4 billion barrels, or 110–140
days net-import equivalent, in December 2025. 10 Figure 1 shows a comparison of the Chinese SPR with
that of other countries. One important feature of the Chinese SPR is the distinction in treatment of
government reserves (orange) and enterprise reserves (green). The latter are held by commercial firms, but
in China they can still be mobilised under national rules stipulated in the 2025 Energy Law (see Section
3.2).11 This arrangement offers Beijing the flexibility to use enterprise reserves as a first line of response,
preserving government-owned strategic stocks for larger disruptions; it is also why the IEA counts both in
the total Chinese SPR, compared to the 413 million barrels held by the US government SPR. This layered
architecture may increase China’s capacity to intervene without immediately signa lling a full -scale
emergency drawdown.12 Notably, both the US and China are net importers of raw crude oil, with China
having surpassed the US as the largest absolute importer in 201713; India, South Korea, Japan and individual

8 US Department of Energy (2026).
9 Li, H., et al. (2017).
10 US Energy Information Administration (2026b).
11 The authority to mobilise enterprise-held reserves is provided for in the 2025 Energy Law (Article 54), which empowers the
state to direct the use of such reserves in response to supply shocks or major market fluctuations. Supporting provisions in the
Energy Law (Article 55) also leave room for interpretation, when the scope of the mobilisation and compliance responsibility are
described to cover not only users and enterprises in the energy section (能源企业、能源用户), but also other relevant individuals
and entities (其他有关单位和个人).
12 Bloomberg News (2026).
13 Even though the US is currently the world’s largest oil producer, it remains a net importer of crude oil. US Energy Information
Administration (2018).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
5
countries in the E uropean Union (EU) are the next largest importers .14 Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates and Iran are net exporters of raw crude oil.15
Figure 1. Crude oil inventories (December 2025)

Source: US Energy Information Administration (2026a).
China has used periods of low oil prices and its position as a major buyer of discounted, often sanctioned,
crude oil to fill its SPR. Crude imports increased by 4.5 per cent from 11.1 million barrels per day in 2024
to 11.6 million in 2025.16 Figure 2 shows the top importers of crude oil to China. Middle Eastern imports
represent a 41 per cent share of imports, mainly comprised of medium-to-heavy, sour crude types. Russian
imports represent 18 per cent, comprised of light, sweet crude from the Eastern Siberia -Pacific Ocean
(ESPO) pipeline and a heavier blend from the Urals.17 Other sources include Brazil (8 per cent), Angola (5
per cent), and Canada (3 per cent).18 Around 22 per cent of reported 2025 imports are estimated to have
been sanctioned – with many Iranian and Venezuelan barrels likely re-exported via Malaysia, for example.19
Domestic crude is often medium -to-heavy with high wax content, motivating China’s extensive heavy
refining capabilities. Since 2005, pockets of light crude deposits have also been discovered within China,
for example in Bohai Bay Basin.20

14 World Integrated Trade Solution (2024).
15 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) (2026).
16 Li, S., & Jackson (2026).
17 ‘Heavy’ versus ‘light’ refers to the density of crude oil, where heavier oils are thicker and tend to yield more residual products,
while lighter oils flow more easily and produce more gasoline and diesel. ‘Sweet’ versus ‘sour’ describes sulphur content, where
sweet crudes have lower sulphur and are easier and cheaper to refine, while sour crudes contain more sulphur and require
additional processing; Down (2026).
18 Down (2026)
19 Down (2026).
20 Zhao et al. (2013).
359 413
263 179 79 82 34 71 21.4
1,038
411
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
China US Japan EU South Korea Saudi Arabia UAE Iran India
CAPACITY (MILLION BARRELS)
Government Commercial

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
RAND Europe
6
Figure 2 . Top crude oil importers to China (2025)

Source: Down (2026).
Collating data from a variety of public sources, Figure 3 illustrates how the SPR has grown physically from
four coastal facilities completed in Dalian, Qingdao, Zhoushan and Zhenhai in 2009 to a national network
of at least 22 above-ground and underground facilities as of 2023. Coastal facilities hold a mix of commercial
(green) and government (orange) facilities c lose to ports of entry. Inland sites are predominantly
government-controlled reserves positioned to stabili se local supply disruptions or commercial reserves
located near major oilfields. Eleven commercial sites are planned to be added by 2026 (light green)
concentrated along the eastern central and lower coast.21

21 Reuters (2025).

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
7
Figure 3. SPR sites detected in China

Source: Li, H., et al. 2017; Pipeline, ports and refineries from ArcGIS Online.
3.2. Policy overview
China’s SPR has evolved from a narrowly defined emergency stockpile into a broader instrument of energy
security, macroeconomic management and state capacity. Initially established to reduce vulnerability to
external supply disruptions, the SPR now sits within a reserve system combining central government stocks,
enterprise-held reserves, and commercial inventories. This transition matters because it gives Beijing more
than one pathway to influence domestic and potentially international oil markets: it can build stocks, rotate
them, release them selectively, or direct enterprise reserves before drawing on central government holdings.22
China’s SPR differs from the classic IEA model in two respects. 23 Firstly, it is embedded in a more
centralised political system in which stockpiling and release decisions can be tied closely to state objectives.
Secondly, Chinese policy has framed reserves as both an emergency buffer and a tool for market stabilisation
and macroeconomic control. Public messaging around the 2021 crude oil reserve auctions, for example,
indicated that the state viewed reserve releases as a way to reduce pressure from rising raw material prices

22 Beijing’s ability to manage oil reserves in these ways can be limited by infrastructure capacity, legal restrictions on intervening
in enterprise stocks, and the need for coordination between government and private actors.
23 National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (PRC) (2018; 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
RAND Europe
8
and support domestic refiners. 24 This suggests that China manages its SPR as an economic policy tool to
shape domestic price conditions and signal state intent to the market.25
A major recent development is the entry into force of the Energy Law of the People’s Republic of China on
1 January 2025, which provides the statutory basis for China’s energy reserve system. The law formalises an
integrated structure of government reserves and enterprise reserves, authori ses state action in response to
supply shocks and major market fluctuations, and strengthens the legal basis for requiring firms to comply
with reserve obligations and mobilisation orders. Prior to this, the policy framework relied heavily on draft
regulations, administrative guidance and planning documents, especially the 2016 Draft Regulations on
National Petroleum Reserves and sectoral guidance issued by the National Development and Reform
Commission (NDRC), the National Energy Administration (NEA), and the National Food and Strategic
Reserves Administration (NFSRA).
Table 1. Main features of China’s SPR policy framework
Dimension Main features Relevance for geoeconomic use
Primary purpose Energy security and supply disruption
management
Provides the core national security
justification for maintaining large stocks
Expanded purpose Market stabilisation and macroeconomic
control
Creates policy space for peacetime
interventions, including price management
Legal basis 2025 Energy Law; earlier draft regulations and
administrative guidance
Strengthens formal authority to mobilise
reserves and direct firms
Reserve structure Government reserves plus enterprise/social
responsibility reserves
Enables layered and selective use of stocks
Decision making Centralised, led by the State Council with
NDRC/NEA planning
Facilitates rapid alignment with wider state
objectives
Execution NFSRA management, SOE (notably CNPC,
Sinopec and CNOOC) infrastructure and
logistics
Gives the state operational reach through
state-linked market actors
Operational tools Stockpiling, rotation, auctions, emergency
drawdown
Provides several channels for market
influence short of a declared emergency
Transparency Limited public disclosure of total inventory
and release logic
Increases uncertainty and amplifies signalling
effects

China appears to rely on stock rotation as a normali sed policy tool. 26 This mechanism can serve several
purposes simultaneously: preserving stock integrity, reducing storage costs, easing domestic supply pressure,
and sending a signal to traders and refiners. The 2021 Dalian crude auction is the clearest documented

24 According to the National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration, the release of crude oil reserves was intended ‘to ease
the pressure of rising raw material prices for key domestic enterprises’ (‘为重点企业缓解原材料价格上涨压力’), and ‘to ensure the
smooth operation of the economy’ (‘保障经济平稳运行’). See National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (PRC)
(2021).
25 National Energy Administration (PRC) (2024).
26 The strategic reserve in China is limited in transparency. Unlike some IEA members, China does not publish official data on
total strategic stocks regularly. Estimates of stock levels rely on customs data, tanker tracking, satellite imagery and secondary
analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
9
example of th e mechanism in action. 27 While modest relative to China’s estimated stockpile, the release
showed China’s willingness to use state-held crude to address domestic cost pressures and shape expectations.28

27 According to the National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration, the September 2021 auction released approximately
738,000 tons (about 7.38 million barrels) of crude oil from the Dalian reserve base. The official rationale was ‘to ease the pressure
of rising raw material prices for key domestic enterprises and ensure the smooth operation of the economy’ (‘为重点企业缓解原
材料价格上涨压力，保障经济平稳运行’). This was the first time China publicly organised such an auction, reflecting a shift
towards using the SPR as a tool for market stabilization in response to international oil price volatility. See National Food and
Strategic Reserves Administration (PRC) (2021).
28 Cang & Blas (2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10
4. SPRs as a geoeconomic tool
Geoeconomic tools are economic instruments that governments leverage to advance geopolitical or strategic
goals.29 Examples include China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI ), in which the building and financing of
infrastructure projects is used by China to achieve strategic objectives .30 China’s past use of strategic
commodities suggests it is not opposed to using the SPR geoeconomically in a selective and state -directed
way. For example, China used its grain reserves in the 1950s –1970s for international diplomacy despite
general food shortages.31 More recently, rare earth export restrictions during the 2010 dispute with Japan
showed how Beijing can use commodity control for diplomatic leverage. 32 SPRs have also been used to
achieve macroeconomic, geoeconomic and geopolitical objectives (Table 2).
Table 2. Examples of the use of SPR s for macroeconomic, geoeconomic and geopolitical purposes
Event Geoeconomic impact Country
2011 Libyan Civil War SPR released in coordination with IEA, offset supply
loss, supported allied energy security
United States & IEA members
2022 Russia-Ukraine
War & Energy Crisis
Released record volumes to limit global price surge,
shield allies, and pressure Russian revenues
United States & IEA members

Table 3 includes a rubric with attributes usually associated in the literature with a geoeconomic tool that
are also present in the case of China’s SPR.33

29 Blackwill & Harris (2016).
30 Rolland (2017).
31 Kasahara & Bingjing (2020); Musabelliu (2019); Frank et al. (2025).
32 Baskaran & Dady (2026).
33 Farrell & Newman (2019).

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
11
Table 3. China’s SPR as a geoeconomic tool rubric
Attribute Definition China’s SPR
Economic
leverage
The ability to influence other countries
or global markets using economic
means.
China has the largest SPR in the world.
Strategic
flexibility
Capacity to deploy or withhold a
resource to advance geopolitical
objectives.
China can act quickly during energy crises or geopolitically
sensitive moments or decide to preserve its SPR.
Deterrence The potential to discourage
undesirable actions from other actors
through the threat or use of economic
measures.
The existence of a large SPR lessens China’s vulnerability
to energy-related coercion, such as embargoes or sudden
supply disruptions from major oil-exporting countries.
Resilience
enhancement
Strengthening a country’s ability to
withstand external economic shocks
or coercion.
The reserve ensures China has capacity to better endure
supply disruptions, mitigating impact on its economy from
global energy shocks and thus providing the stability
needed for continued economic growth and development.
Policy
signalling
Using economic tools to communicate
intentions, resolve or capabilities to
international actors.
By publicly announcing additions to its SPR or allowing
releases during crises, China can signal its preparedness
and resolve to both allies and adversaries, demonstrating
its capacity to manage energy risks and pursue
independent energy policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12
5. Vignette analysis
To examine the different strategic ways in which China could deploy its SPR, we developed a number of
vignettes. Vignettes are brief descriptions of hypothetical situation s that are presented to knowledgeable
individuals, who are then asked to share their normative judgements, views and assessment of them.34 To
draft the vignettes, we selected 12 drivers based on the PESTLE framework: six enabling drivers, which
could encourage China to use the SPR in a geoeconomic way , as outlined in Table 3 above, and six
restricting drivers, which could limit China’s use of the SPR as a geoeconomic tool (see Annex).35 Based on
these drivers, we created eight vignettes that we presented to a panel of four RAND subject-matter experts
with a background in macroeconomics, China studies and international relations, during a two -hour
workshop. The experts were asked to comment on the vignettes and their underlying drivers and discuss
why a certain vignette would or would not represent a plausible policy decision for the Chinese central
government.36 The experts considered three vignettes to represent plausible policy outcomes:

Strategic caution
In the face of mounting global volatility, China adopts a cautious approach towards its SPR.
Domestic policymakers calibrate reserve usage to shield the nation from external shocks, such as
rising oil prices, sanctions and regional instability. Instead of large-scale releases, authorities
allow state refining companies to tap commercial reserves at a modest pace. Some level of higher
prices and public discontent are accepted but tightly monitored. While this approach frustrates
some industries seeking relief, it reassures the public and global partners that China remains
committed to resilience and stability, preserving its energy security amid an increasingly volatile
world.
Expert assessment
The subject-matter experts considered this to be the most likely scenario, and most in line with
China’s focus on energy security and resilience, favouring cautious and limited SPR releases to
preserve energy security amid uncertainty.

34 Vignette analysis is a qualitative research method which has been used across a range of social science, education, healthcare
and policy analyses. See Hughes et al. (2008); Tremblay et al. (2022); Verneuer-Emre (2022); Almlöf (2023).
35 Enabling drivers: Sanctions and Signalling Resilience; Global Energy Market Influence; Energy Portfolio Diversification;
Regional Security Signalling; Strategic Industry Prioritisation; Strategic Partnerships with the Global South. Restricting drivers:
Long-term Security of Supply Challenges; Domestic Stability and Public Discontent; Weakening Economic Conditions; Market
Volatility Risk; International Coordination Challenges; Energy Transition Uncertainty.
36 This application of vignette analysis to policy analysis and political decision making builds on the approach outlined in Bakker
et al. (2014).

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
13

Precision relief
Recognising unequal impacts of disruptions to energy supply across provinces and sectors, such
as coastal manufacturing hubs or agribusiness, Beijing authorises selective and targeted
drawdowns to alleviate acute shortages for factories, transportation and key regional markets.
This approach balances national energy security with the need to prevent economic bottlenecks
and allows China to maintain growth and stability in its most competitive sectors while keeping
broader reserve depletion in check. The government’s strategic focus on targeted relief is lauded
by business leaders and regional officials, who see it as a lifeline, but it draws criticism from those
outside the prioritised zones. International partners interpret the move as China flexing its
reserve-management capabilities to reinforce domestic advantage, while also hinting at its
capacity for finely tuned economic interventions in a crisis.
Expert assessment
The experts found the precision relief scenario highly realistic, noting that China’s policy system
enables targeted interventions by directing SPR resources to specific regions or sectors in crisis.
They highlighted that China already differentiates policy across provinces and industries, has the
administrative capacity for such selective actions, and would be motivated to prevent major
economic disruptions in critical areas while minimising overall reserve depletion. This capacity to
direct SPR deployment may give China an advantage over other countries that take a more
market-based approach to SPR releases.

Strategic energy diplomacy
Amid acute fuel shortages and market instability across Asia and the developing world, China
leverages its SPR to expand its regional and global influence. Offering vital oil and refined
products – particularly jet fuel – to selected countries facing crises, Beijing provides energy relief
at below-market rates, but ties these lifelines to expectations of diplomatic alignment or
economic cooperation. To deepen these relationships and promote greater monetary sovereignty,
China pioneers SPR-backed deals denominated in yuan, testing the potential for currency
diversification and providing an attractive alternative to countries vulnerable to dollar-based
sanctions or financial pressure. This strategy not only secures new partners and strengthens
China’s position as a leading energy supplier, but also challenges Western influence, especially in
the Global South.
Expert assessment
The experts believed it is possible that China would use its SPR to provide jet fuel and other
refined products as diplomatic incentives, consistent with its preference for offering ‘carrots’
rather than imposing punishments in international engagement. While such conditional energy
aid is likely to help China secure strategic partnerships in Asia and the Global South, recipient
countries may remain cautious about becoming too dependent.

China’s approach to its SPR is likely to remain cautious and conservative over the short to medium term ,
with the country only rarely and carefully releasing SPR volumes, even during episodes of elevated market
volatility or external shocks. This is consistent with the current policy focus on domestic stability and
resilience. This cautious stance is reinforced by the continuing opacity surrounding China’s SPR data –
which contrasts with the transparency requirements of IEA members – and the central government’s desire
to keep its options open.
Over the medium to long term, China’s energy landscape will evolve as it continues to electrify its economy
and scale up its nuclear and renewable energy generation capacity. A reduced economic petroleum intensity
would mean that China needs fewer petroleum reserves to cover its needs over a prolonged period of time.
At the same time, experts agreed that it is unlikely China would deliberately reduce the size of its SPR in
the medium term. Even as the civilian energy system transitions to low-carbon sources, military applications
will likely remain dependent on liquid fuels for longer. Preparedness for potential conflict underpins the
need for substantial strategic oil stocks regardless of gains in renewables or electrification.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
RAND Europe
14
The experts agreed that the combination of these two trends could give China the policy space to pursue a
more ambitious use of the SPR as a geoeconomic instrument. For example, China could use targeted SPR
releases to support strategic partners, as leverage in bilateral relationships or to build influence, especially in
the Global South or within the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The other vignettes on the longlist were also debated. For instance, using aggressive SPR releases to undercut
global competitors and gain industrial advantage , for example by subsidi sing petrochemicals or
manufacturing exports, was deemed improbable. Experts pointed to the risks of domestic backlash, the
existing overcapacity in Chinese industry, and concerns about provoking defensive reactions in key markets
such as the EU and US. Deploying the SPR as part of coordinated international releases was recognised to
be possible in theory, particularly in the context of a severe global crisis, but China’s historical preference
for unilateralism means such moves remain unlikely except in truly extreme circumstances.
The experts also examined the appeal for China of using the SPR in a broader geoeconomic strategy, such
as advancing renminbi internationalisation. SPR -backed oil deals denominated in yuan are already
occurring, particularly with smaller or sanctioned trading partners , but the experts noted that meaningful
progress toward s a true ‘ petroyuan’ system would require much deeper domestic reforms, including
significant capital account and financial liberalisation. At present, such deals provide useful signa lling and
incremental progress, but are not expected to catalys e a dramatic shift in global energy trade currency
dynamics without broader systemic changes. 37
Finally, the concept of leveraging the SPR to build regional or global alliances, for example through ASEAN
energy diplomacy or a China- led alternative to the US -oriented IEA coordination mechanism , was
considered intriguing but challenging. The experts noted that while China has an incentive to be seen as a
‘team player ’ and to increase its regional leadership, reali sing such a coalition would require sustained
diplomatic effort and greater transparency. ASEAN member states may remain wary of Chinese intentions
and reluctant to tie their own energy security to Chinese decision making without robust institutional
mechanisms and trust.
In summary, the experts underscored that the evolution of China’s SPR policy over the coming years is
likely to proceed incrementally, but with the potential for more assertive geoeconomic uses as China’s
energy landscape and confidence grows. The SPR is poised to remain a key instrument of national resilience,
even as its potential role as a tool of external influence expands.
37 See also Gang (2026).

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
15
6. Conclusion
The RAND subject-matter experts who took part in the workshop agreed that China’s SPR has grown into
a substantial and increasingly sophisticated system, with a capacity rivalling the world’s largest oil importers
and backed by a recently strengthened legal and institutional framework. The baseline scenario – strategic
caution – was identified as the most likely, with China prioritising energy security, domestic resilience and
stability through conservative, sparing SPR releases. This approach reflects Xi Jinping’s leadership priorities
and China’s traditional risk aversion in managing critical resources.
At the same time, experts viewed the precision relief scenario, where SPR resources are selectively released
to specific provinces or sectors facing acute shortages, as highly realistic. China’s established tradition of
differentiated policy and administrative flexibility supports such targeted interventions, enabling authorities
to address bottlenecks in strategic areas while preserving broader reserve integrity. In contrast, the US
approach is more centrali sed and transparent, prioriti sing broad, market -based SPR releases to achieve
national-scale impact rather than precision targeting within its own economy. The experts also noted that
conditional energy diplomacy, such as providing jet fuel or refined petroleum products to secure influence
and partnerships, remains a plausible instrument, especially in Asia and the Global South.
Looking ahead, the panel noted that China’s ongoing energy transition – with increased electrification,
renewables and nuclear power – may diminish its dependence on oil over the course of the next two decades.
This shift could allow Beijing to use the SPR more assertively for diplomatic or geoeconomic gains,
especially in crises or when cultivating strategic relationships. Overall, the workshop underscored the
dynamic role of China’s SPR, suggesting its management will be increasingly consequential for global energy
security and international power balances, and highlighted the importance of ongoing monitoring and analysis.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16
References
Almlöf, Erik. 2023. ‘Using Vignettes to Explore Policy Tools for a Self-Driving Transport Future.’
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives 22: 133–40.
doi:10.1016/j.trip.2023.100922
Bakker, Ryan, Erica Edwards, Seth Jolly, Jonathan Polk, Jan Rovny & Marco Steenbergen. 2014.
‘Anchoring the Experts: Using Vignettes to Compare Party Ideology Across Countries.’ Research
& Politics 1(3). doi:10.1177/2053168014553502
Baskaran, Gracelin, & Samantha Dady. 2026. ‘Minerals at War: Strategic Resources and the Foundations
of the U.S. Defense Industrial Base.’ Center for Strategic and International Studies, 14 January.
As of 4 June 2026:
https://www.csis.org/analysis/minerals-war-strategic-resources-and-foundations-us-defense-
industrial-base
Blackwill, Robert D., & Jennifer M. Harris. 2016. War by Other Means: Geoeconomics and Statecraft.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bloomberg News. 2026. ‘Chinese Oil Major Vows “All-Out” Effort to Ensure Domestic Supply.’ 30
April. As of 25 June 2026:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2026-04-30/chinese-oil-major-vows-all-out-effort-
to-ensure-domestic-supply
Cang, Alfred, & Javier Blas. 2021. ‘China Sells Oil Reserves to Lower Prices in Unprecedented Move.’ Al
Jazeera, 9 September. As of 26 June 2026:
https://www.aljazeera.com/economy/2021/9/9/china-sells-oil-reserves-to-lower-prices-in-
unprecedented-move
Down, Erica. 2026. ‘Where China Gets Its Oil: Crude Imports in 2025 Reveal Stockpiling and Changing
Fortunes of Certain Suppliers, Including Those Sanctioned.’ Columbia Center on Energy
Policy, 29 January. As of 4 May 2026:
https://www.energypolicy.columbia.edu/where-china-gets-its-oil-crude-imports-in-2025-reveal-
stockpiling-and-changing-fortunes-of-certain-suppliers-including-those-sanctioned/
Farrell, Henry, & Abraham L. Newman. 2019. ‘Weaponized Interdependence: How Global Economic
Networks Shape State Coercion.’ International Security 44(1): 42–79.
doi:10.1162/isec_a_00351

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
17
Frank, Eyal, Qinyun Wang, Shaoda Wang, Xeubin Wang & Yang You. 2025. ‘Campaigning for
Extinction: Eradication of Sparrows and the Great Famine in China.’ National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper 34087.
Gang, Chen. 2026. ‘Petroyuan on the horizon: The Middle East crisis rewires global oil finance.’
ThinkChina, 20 April. As of 4 June 2026:
https://www.thinkchina.sg/economy/petroyuan-horizon-middle-east-crisis-rewires-global-oil-
finance
Hughes, Rhidian, M. Huby, B. Parkinson, A.S.R. Manstead & T. Wilks. 2008. ‘Vignettes.’ In The SAGE
Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research Methods, edited by Lisa M. Given.
doi:10.4135/9781412963909.n482
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2026a. ‘IEA member countries to carry out largest ever oil stock
release amid market disruptions from Middle East conflict.’ 11 March. As of 2 June 2026:
https://www.iea.org/news/iea-member-countries-to-carry-out-largest-ever-oil-stock-release-
amid-market-disruptions-from-middle-east-conflict
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2026b. ‘SPR Quick Facts.’ As of 3 June 2026:
https://www.energy.gov/hgeo/opr/spr-quick-facts
Kasahara, Hiroyuki, & Li Bingjing. 2020. ‘Grain Exports and the Causes of China’s Great Famine,
1959–1961: County-Level Evidence.’ Journal of Development Economics 146.
doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2020.102513
Li, Hui, Ren-Jin Sun, Kang-Yin Dong, Xiu-Cheng Dong, Zhong-Ben Zhou & Xia Leng. 2017.
‘Selecting China’s Strategic Petroleum Reserve Sites by Multi-Objective Programming Model.’
Petroleum Science 14: 622–35. doi:10.1007/s12182-017-0175-0
Li, Sam, & Lewis Jackson. 2026. ‘China’s 2025 oil imports, December inflows both hit record highs.’
Reuters, 14 January. As of 4 May 2026:
https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/chinas-2025-oil-imports-december-inflows-both-hit-
record-highs-2026-01-14/
Makos, Jim. 2024. ‘What is PESTLE Analysis?’ PESTLE Analysis, 10 April. As of 25 June 2026:
https://pestleanalysis.com/what-is-pestle-analysis/
Meidan, Michal. 2026. The Drivers of China’s Crude Buying Binge. Oxford Institute for Energy Studies.
As of 25 June 2026:
https://www.oxfordenergy.org/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2026/02/Comment-The-drivers-of-
Chinas-crude-buying-binge.pdf
Ministry of Ecology and Environment (People’s Republic of China). 2007. ‘China Starts First National
Oil Reserve Base.’ Xinhua News Agency, 27 December. As of 28 May 2026:
https://english.mee.gov.cn/News_service/media_news/200712/t20071227_115523.shtml
Musabelliu, Marsela. 2019. ‘Sino-Albanian Relations: 70 years of diplomatic ties in retrospect.’ China-
CEE Institute, Working Paper 2019(8). As of 25 June 2026:
https://china-cee.eu/working_papers/sino-albanian-relations-70-years-of-diplomatic-ties-in-
retrospect/

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
RAND Europe
18
National Energy Administration (People’s Republic of China). 2024. Energy Law of the People’s
Republic of China (中华人民共和国能源法), adopted by the Standing Committee of the
14th National People’s Congress. As of 8 July 2026:
http://www.nea.gov.cn/2024-11/09/c_1310787187.htm
National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (People’s Republic of China). 2018. Provisions on
the Functions, Internal Organization, and Staffing of the National Food and Strategic Reserves
Administration (国家粮食和物资储备局职能配置、内设机构和人员编制规定). As of 8
July 2026: https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/chn181642.pdf
National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (People’s Republic of China). 2021. ‘China has
conducted its first trial of reserve crude release’ (国家组织投放首批国家储备原油). People’s
Daily [人民日报], 20 September. As of 30 May 2026:
http://paper.people.com.cn/zgnybwap/html/2021-09/20/content_25880770.htm
National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration (People’s Republic of China). 2026. Energy Reserve
Department (能源储备司). As of 8 July 2026:
https://www.lswz.gov.cn/html/sjzz/nycbs/index.shtml
O’Brient, Samuel. 2026. ‘Why a historic release of emergency crude reserves might not tame soaring oil
prices.’ Business Insider, 11 March. As of 25 June 2026:
https://africa.businessinsider.com/markets/why-a-historic-release-of-emergency-crude-reserves-
might-not-tame-soaring-oil-prices/n1yy2vf
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). 2026. ‘Annual Statistical Bulletin.’ As of 25
June 2026: https://www.opec.org/annual-statistical-bulletin.html
Reuters. 2025. ‘China adding 11 new oil reserve sites in 2025 and 2026.’ 7 October. As of 4 May 2026:
https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/china-adding-11-new-oil-reserve-sites-2025-2026-
2025-10-07/
Rolland, Nadège. 2017. China’s Eurasian Century? Political and Strategic Implications of the Belt and Road
Initiative. National Bureau of Asian Research.
Tremblay, Dominique, Annie Turcotte, Nassera Touati, Thomas G. Poder, Kelley Kilpatrick, Karine
Bilodeau, Mathieu Roy, Patrick O. Richard, Sylvie Lessard & Émilie Giordano. 2022.
‘Development and Use of Research Vignettes to Collect Qualitative Data from Healthcare
Professionals: A Scoping Review.’ BMJ Open 12: 1–13. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-057095
US Department of Energy. 2026. ‘SPR Origins.’ As of 28 May 2026:
https://www.energy.gov/hgeo/opr/spr-origins
US Energy Information Administration. 2018. ‘China surpassed the United States as the world’s largest
crude oil importer in 2017.’ Today in Energy, 31 December. As of 28 May 2026:
https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/us-energy-facts/imports-and-exports.php

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
19
———. 2026a. ‘China, the United States, and Japan hold most strategic oil inventories in 2025.’ Today
in Energy, 20 April. As of June 2, 2026:
https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=67504
———. 2026b. ‘Short-Term Energy Outlook (STEO).’ As of 25 June 2026:
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo/outlook.php
Verneuer-Emre, Lena, Stefanie Eifler & Hermann Dülmer. 2022. ‘Vignette Analysis: Methodology and
Recent Developments.’ Methods, Data, Analyses 16(2): 133–40. doi:10.18154/RWTH-2022-
08645
World Integrated Trade Solution. 2024. ‘Petroleum oils and oils obtained from bituminou imports by
country in 2024.’ World Bank. As of 25 June 2026:
https://wits.worldbank.org/trade/comtrade/en/country/All/year/2024/tradeflow/Imports/partne
r/WLD/product/270900
Zhao, Xianzheng, Qiang Jin, Fengming Jin, Peng Ma, Quan Wang, Jing Wang, Chunling Ren &
Qiuling Xi. 2013. ‘Origin and Accumulation of High-Maturity Oil and Gas in Deep Parts of
the Baxian Depression, Bohai Bay Basin, China.’ Petroleum Science 10: 303–13.
doi:10.1007/s12182-013-0279-0

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20
Annex A. Annex
For the development of the scenarios, the project team referred to six enabling drivers, which could
encourage China to use the SPR in a geoeconomic way, and six restricting drivers, which could limit China’s
use of the SPR as a geoeconomic tool. These drivers are outlined in the tables 4 and 5 below.
Table 4. Enabling drivers
 Driver name Driver is strong Driver is medium Driver is weak
Sanctions and
Signalling
Resilience
China faces ongoing, severe Western
sanctions or credible threats of supply
disruption and must visibly demonstrate
resilience.
Severe disruptions are possible or
moderate but not likely; some
resilience signalling is needed but
not prioritised.
International environment is
cooperative or stable; little threat
of disruptions or embargoes.
Global Energy
Market
Influence
China has the capacity, intent and
opportunity to move or set global oil prices
with clear market interventions.
China participates in market
signalling but is one of several
influential players; interventions
affect regional or short-term prices.
China’s market interventions
have minimal global impact; little
incentive or capacity for price
setting.
Energy
Portfolio
Diversification
China has robust alternatives
(renewables/nuclear), making it less reliant
on oil and allowing bold SPR use.
Alternatives are growing but not yet
dominant, allowing some flexibility
but not total independence from oil.
China remains highly dependent
on oil; little leeway for bold SPR
action.
Regional
Security
Signalling
Regional tensions (e.g. Taiwan, South
China Sea) are high and energy measures
are clearly linked to security signalling or
deterrence.
There are ongoing, but not acute,
regional disputes that require
occasional energy signalling.
Regional environment is calm;
energy policy is not linked to
security messaging.
Strategic
Industry
Prioritisation
Critical sectors (e.g. manufacturing,
agriculture) face acute stress and require
government support through energy flows.
Some industries are stressed, but
require only targeted or partial
intervention.
Industries are healthy; no special
need for supportive SPR releases.
Strategic
Partnerships
with the
Global South
China seeks to actively build influence and
goodwill in the Global South with frequent
supply deals and SPR aid.
Engagement with developing
countries is ongoing but not
aggressive; selective aid or swaps
occur.
Minimal outreach; SPR is used
primarily for domestic priorities.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
China’s strategic petroleum reserve as a geoeconomic tool
21
Table 5. Restricting drivers
 Driver name Driver is strong Driver is medium Driver is weak
Long-term
Security of
Supply
Challenges
Chronic concerns about energy import
dependence and supply continuity; high
motivation to conserve reserves.
Some anxiety about future scarcity,
but not overriding; balanced
consideration in reserve policy.
Supply security is not a major
worry; imports are stable and
plentiful.
Domestic
Stability and
Public
Discontent
High risk or presence of public
unrest/inflation if reserves are prioritised
externally; domestic priorities dominate.
Some public dissatisfaction, but
not at crisis level; balanced with
other interests.
Public accepts government
energy policy; little visible
discontent.
Weakening
Economic
Conditions
Growth is sluggish, inflation and
unemployment are high, and consumer
sentiment is poor; economic crisis
dominates decision-making.
Economic signals are mixed;
policymakers are cautious but not
alarmed.
Economy is robust and growing;
little economic constraint on
reserve use.
Market
Volatility Risk
Oil prices are extremely volatile; market
swings make large SPR actions risky and
potentially ineffective.
Moderate price changes and some
uncertainty; manageable but
notable risk.
Oil prices are stable and
predictable; timing and scale of
SPR use is straightforward.
International
Coordination
Challenges
Major challenges in aligning SPR policy
with other countries; cooperation is slow
or politically fraught.
Some misalignment or technical
issues but coordination is possible
with effort.
Coordination is easy and
effective; China can act
seamlessly with partners.
Energy
Transition
Uncertainty
Uncertainty about pace and scale of shift
to renewables/nuclear casts doubt on
reserve planning and usage.
Transition is happening but
somewhat predictable; some risk
to reserve management.
Energy transition is slow or well-
anticipated; little uncertainty
affects SPR policy.
