
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
The International Institute
for Strategic Studies
The Security Implications
of Developments
in Biotechnology
Nariyoshi Shinomiya, Visiting Senior Researcher,
National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Japan;
Kiwako Tanaka, Associate Professor, Toyo Eiwa University,
and Adjunct Professor, Temple University, Japan

February 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 3
 Executive Summary 4
Section 1: Advances in Key Biotechnologies 6
 Genomics 6
 Synthetic Biology 6
 Genome Editing 7
 Convergence with AI 7
 Implications 7
Section 2: Geopolitics and National-security Risks 9
 Biosecurity Threats 9
 The Dual-use Dilemma 9
 Economic Security 10
 Diffusion of Capabilities 11
 Lack of Controls: Ethics 12
 Lack of Controls: Data Protection 13
 Broadening Access 14
Section 3: Looking Ahead 15
 Addressing Weaknesses in Existing Safeguards 16
 A ‘Whole of Society’ Approach 19
 Notes 20
Cover
DNA testing in a laboratory (Photo by Westend61 via Getty Images)
Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
4 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Executive Summary
This report focuses on the security implications that
have arisen as a result of developments in biotechnol-
ogy in recent decades.
To set the scene, we first look at the rapid advances
in genetic-modification technology since the 1970s;
the development of synthetic biology since 2000; the
research related to genetic engineering, which has
brought about technological innovation since 2000;
and the innovative aspects of genome-editing technol-
ogy (CRISPR/Cas9), which first appeared in 2012. We
discuss the positive and negative aspects of these tech-
nologies, and in particular the importance of advanced
life-science technologies from the perspective of risk–
benefit analysis and biosecurity.
The ability to understand, recreate and manipulate
the basic building blocks of life is driving the growth
of the bioeconomy. This includes the commercialisa-
tion of biological processes, such as modifying living
organisms to perform additional or enhanced functions.
Biotechnology is becoming increasingly important for
national economic security and competitiveness in global
markets; countries are therefore vying for leadership in
all of its fields, including its medical, agricultural and
environmental applications. The United States, China,
the European Union and Japan, among others, have been
issuing strategic documents on biotechnology and incor-
porating it into their economic-security strategies.
Biotechnology has made it possible to manipulate
genetic material for medicinal and agricultural pur-
poses, and the opportunities for novel applications
have grown exponentially. These ongoing innovations
are having a profound impact on health, industry and
the environment. But as the manipulation of genetic
material becomes more widespread, the risk of acciden-
tal release of harmful organisms increases, as does the
likelihood of unintended side effects.
The safety and reliability of genome editing are not
technically guaranteed, and the ability to manipulate
and modify life at the genomic level has led to grow-
ing concerns about the impact of editing the human
genome. Such concerns are further heightened by the
increasing convergence of biotechnology and artificial
intelligence. There are also concerns that the expansion
of gene editing could lead to eugenic practices, and
about the potential knock-on effects for the offspring of
people with edited human genomes. Although no coun-
try has yet approved the genome editing of fertilised
human embryos, genome editing is currently being
tested in laboratories worldwide.
Furthermore, consumer genetic-testing and genome-
analysis services are becoming more widely available
as providers are increasingly adopting the direct-to-
consumer (DTC) model. However, many of these ser-
vices are often carried out without the involvement of
medical specialists, arousing concerns that decisions
will be made without a scientific basis, potentially lead-
ing to misdiagnoses or inappropriate use. In the US,
law-enforcement agencies have also used DTC genomic
data to identify suspects in criminal investigations, pos-
sibly violating the terms and conditions for the use of
personal data. There is an argument, however, that the
perceived public good should supersede privacy inter-
ests, which would allow courts to accept DTC genomic
data in law-enforcement investigations and legal cases.
Though advances in biotechnology create the poten-
tial for breakthroughs in medicine, agriculture, envi-
ronmental management and industry, they also bring
risks and ethical dilemmas. In particular, there are con-
cerns that synthetic biology could be used for malicious
purposes, such as the production of biological weap-
ons. There is also a risk of accidental release of synthetic
organisms, even in controlled laboratory environments.
If these organisms spread uncontrollably, they could
pose serious threats to public health and the environ-
ment. Continued advances in synthetic biology have
therefore only fuelled the growing demand for a robust
international regulatory framework to manage these
risks and prevent misuse.
At present, the multilateral legal framework for
preventing biotechnology from having an adverse

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 5
impact on international security includes the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC), signed by 187 states, and
UN Security Council Resolution 1540. However, within
these frameworks there has been no agreement on a veri-
fication system to ensure countries are implementing the
BWC, or on a mechanism for more in-depth monitor-
ing. Also, because every country has a different stance
on biotechnology, based on their culture and ethical val-
ues, there is no consensus on what degree of regulation
to adopt. It is therefore difficult to formulate globally
accepted guidelines. International organisations such as
the World Health Organization and European Molecular
Biology Laboratory are advocating careful regulation,
transparency, and ongoing public dialogue to encourage
the responsible use of genome-editing technology and to
ensure it is developed with ethical foresight.
The challenge in regulating emerging technologies
lies in the need to constantly expand the scope of gov-
ernance. In the case of biotechnology, because there
are multiple areas of concern – including biosafety,
ecology, distributive justice, national security and the
impact on climate change – the governance challenge is
to incorporate interdisciplinary and multi-sectoral per-
spectives, and to build a whole-of-society approach.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
6 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
1. Advances in Key Biotechnologies
Developments in biotechnology are progressing rap-
idly, and there is growing interest in their geopoliti-
cal impact. In particular, the development of synthetic
biology is expected to make it possible to artificially
create various living organisms and materials, and
to contribute to the treatment of diseases, the stable
supply of food, and the mitigation of climate change
through the reduction of carbon-dioxide emissions.
The development of genome-editing technology is sig-
nificantly improving human welfare in various fields,
including health, food, climate, energy, and supply-
chain resilience.
States will be competing to be the first to develop
new biotechnologies, and to use them to gain a strategic
advantage. Although biotechnology has the potential
to make a profound contribution to collective human
prosperity and scientific discovery, the most power-
ful nations are likely to use their strategic advantage to
exploit new biotechnologies, and the markets derived
from them, in pursuit of their own geopolitical goals.
Furthermore, synthetic biology and genome-editing
technologies could not only have unintentionally
destructive effects if their safety is compromised but
also could be deliberately misused. The ability to under-
stand and manipulate genetic information could lead to
the creation of increasingly effective biological agents
and defences against them, potentially sparking a bio-
technological arms race.
Over the past two decades, scientists have gained
the ability to understand genes, and to manipulate
and engineer from scratch the building blocks of life.
Overall, these developments have transformed biology
from a purely observational science into one where life
can be engineered. The following sections provide a
brief overview of what is possible with the technology
available today.
Genomics
Genomics refers to the comprehensive study of the
structures, functions and interactions of an organism’s
complete set of DNA, including those of its genes.
This knowledge was greatly advanced by the Human
Genome Project (1990–2003), an international effort
(although most participating institutions were
American, and it was funded partly by the US Institutes
of Health) that succeeded in almost completely decod -
ing the human genome sequence by 2003. Subsequent
advances in next-generation gene-sequencing tech-
nology, along with falling costs, have greatly boosted
progress in this field, which has included research that
collects and analyses the genomic data of many indi-
viduals to elucidate the relationship between cellu-
lar physiological functions, genetic traits and disease
susceptibility.
Synthetic Biology
Synthetic biology, an interdisciplinary field combining
traditional biology, bioengineering, electrical engineer-
ing and information science, involves the redesign of
existing natural biological systems to enhance utility
or to create wholly new systems. From the outset, syn-
thetic biology has been closely linked to research into
infectious diseases, beginning with the complete artifi-
cial synthesis of the poliovirus in 2002. Following the
creation of horsepox virus in 2017, it is widely believed
that the technology to artificially synthesise all viruses
has already been achieved.
Furthermore, in 2008, scientists succeeded in syn-
thesising the world’s first artificial bacterial genome –
a breakthrough in synthetic biology that provided an
unprecedented insight into the basic building blocks
of life.1 Efforts to develop and study minimal synthetic
cells – those possessing only the machinery necessary
for independent life – can also provide a platform for
creating custom-designed organisms for various uses,
such as drug production, environmental remediation
and industrial processes.
Synthetic biology builds upon genomics and rDNA
to create and modify biological systems from scratch,
pushing the boundaries of what can be achieved in

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 7
Along with her co-researcher Jennifer Doudna, Emmanuelle
Charpentier was awarded the 2020 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for
her work in developing the CRISPR/Cas9 mechanism
(Photo by Odd Andersen/AFP via Getty Images)
genetic manipulation. The ability to engineer organisms
with novel capabilities could yield unprecedented ben-
efits in health, agriculture and environmental manage-
ment. However, it could also lead to security challenges
such as the creation of new bioweapons.
Genome Editing
Genome editing has existed in the form of recombinant-
DNA technology since the 1970s, but the most sig-
nificant progress began in the 1990s. In 2012 scientists
discovered the CRISPR/Cas9 mechanism and recog-
nised its potential as a genome-editing tool. It spread
rapidly around the world due to its accessibility (rela-
tively inexpensive tools for labs) and convenience (it
is easy to give it specificity to recognise target DNA
base sequences). CRISPR/Cas9 has enabled more scien-
tists to make precise, targeted changes to the DNA of
living organisms.
The applications of genome-editing technology
using CRISPR/Cas9 are not limited to the rewriting of
a single gene but have expanded to include edits that
could ultimately affect entire genetic systems of organ-
isms, reshaping their appearance and their responses to
their environments.
Convergence with AI
The convergence of synthetic biology and AI has made
it possible to conduct functional-genomics experiments
on computers, and research has progressed to the stage
where the function of gene sequences can be predicted
even before they are assembled, even for combinations
that have not yet been seen in nature.
Significant progress is being made in the study of the
three-dimensional structure of proteins. These insights
have the potential to lead to the development of func-
tional inhibitors and functional stimulants that fit into
proteins in three dimensions. Advances in AI technol-
ogy have enabled scientists to predict the higher-order
structure of new proteins with remarkable accuracy,
based on the structural data of existing proteins.
AI-based protein-structure-prediction technology is
expected to provide a significant boost to the pharma-
ceutical industry, not only because it can accurately pre-
dict the structures of effective drugs but also because it
enables cost-efficient drug design.
Implications
Biotechnology is frequently described as ‘dual use’
in the sense that it can be used not only for beneficial
scientific purposes but also for harmful ones. One of
the main security concerns is that the convergence of
emerging technologies could accelerate the identifica-
tion of harmful genes and DNA sequences, potentially
making it significantly easier to turn low-risk patho-
gens into high-risk threats. This could also facilitate the
development of completely new pathogens and even
the recreation of extinct high-risk ones. 2 There was an
example of this in 2001, when Australian researchers
working on a mouse contraceptive as part of a pest-
control project unintentionally altered the mousepox
virus. This development indicated the possibility of
creating a vaccine-resistant variant of a more harmful
virus, such as smallpox – a capability potentially appli-
cable to the production of a biological weapon.
Since the development of CRISPR/Cas9 in 2012, these
concerns have intensified. Although its application
currently requires a certain level of expertise, its use
is expected to become easier and more widespread in
the near future. Its greater accessibility, in turn, would
increase the risk of its misuse – whether intentional or
accidental. In addition, the fusion of synthetic biology
and AI has created a new security concern in the form
of the development of ultra-targeted biological weap-
ons. This issue was highlighted in 2016 by the United
States’ then-director of national intelligence, James R.
Clapper, in a hearing before the Senate Armed Services
Committee on the worldwide threat assessment that

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
8 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
For the /f_irst time,
scientists create a fully
functional synthetic
virus, capable of causing
disease in humans
Reconstruction of
1918 in/f_luenza
(‘Spanish /f_lu’) virus
Researchers create
the world’s /f_irst
arti/f_icially synthesised
bacterial genome
Researchers create the
/f_irst self-replicating
synthetic bacterial cell
Creation of the world’s
smallest genome
bacterium makes it
possible for researchers
to determine the
minimum number of
genes required for life to
divide and reproduce
Reconstruction of
horsepox virus
Reconstruction of
SARS-CoV-2
Discovery of
gene-editing mechanism
CRISPR/Cas9 makes
it possible to edit genes
at lower cost, with less
expensive equipment
Conclusion of the
Human Genome Project
Genomics Genetic engineering Synthetic biology
2002
2003
2005
2008
2010
2012
2016
2018
2020
Source: Authors
Figure 1.1: Key advances in biotechnology genome editing could be applied to weapons of mass
destruction and their proliferation.3
The integration of AI with genetic engineering and
synthetic biology could lead to the automation of com -
plex biotechnological processes, which could acceler-
ate their application for beneficial purposes but also
increase the pace and scale of their potential misuse.
AI could also drive the development of more sophis-
ticated genetic modifications by predicting outcomes
or optimising genetic sequences, which raises concerns
about the creation of unforeseen or uncontrollable
biological systems.
The advances in biotechnology are also leading to
the expansion of biomanufacturing, which is creating
geopolitical competition and tension. Through bio-
manufacturing, countries can reduce their dependence
on imports of pharmaceuticals, speciality chemical
products and speciality materials; and because bioman-
ufacturing can use renewable resources such as plant-
derived raw materials, it is often more energy efficient
and environmentally friendly than conventional meth-
ods. However, biomanufacturing involves advanced
biotechnology, and in many cases relies on technologi-
cal innovations such as synthetic biology, genetic engi-
neering and genetic automation. If intellectual property
rights for such technological innovations can be secured,
they will potentially boost a country’s competitiveness
in global markets and enhance its economic security.
But there are concerns that biomanufacturing could be
misused, for example to produce harmful pathogens.
Safety measures, regulatory frameworks and careful
monitoring are needed in order to minimise such risks.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 9
2. Geopolitics and National-security Risks
While the development of biotechnology could bring great
benefits, there are also concerns about its dual-use nature.
Biosecurity Threats
There are records of biological agents being used as weap-
ons as early as the fourteenth century, but due to their
instability and the fact that their effects are often delayed
rather than immediate, they have frequently been con-
sidered ineffective for modern military use. 4 Biological
weapons are completely prohibited by the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction, usually known as
the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), which
came into effect in 1975. At that time there was no great
concern about the impact of genetic-modification tech-
nology on the development of biological weapons, but
scientific and technological capabilities have advanced
significantly since then.
Public awareness of the threat of bioterrorism has
increased in the last 30 years. In 1995 in Japan, it became
clear that the Aum Shinrikyo cult had been developing
biological weapons such as anthrax and botulinum bac-
teria; and in 2001 in the US, shortly after the 9/11 terror-
ist attacks, several addresses were targeted with letters
containing anthrax spores, sent through the postal sys-
tem. These events led to the adoption of UN Security
Council Resolution 1540 in 2004, which requires states
to implement effective laws and other measures to pre-
vent non-state actors from acquiring nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their related materials. In
2005 they also prompted the WHO General Assembly
to revise the International Health Regulations to high-
light bioterrorism as a key threat, as part of broader
efforts to strengthen global health security.
At the same time as the threat of bioterrorism was
growing, governments began to recognise the need to
strengthen national public-health systems in response to
outbreaks of diseases such as Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS) in 2003, H1N1 influenza (swine flu)
in 2009 and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)
in 2012. These outbreaks were followed by the 2014–15
Ebola epidemic in West Africa, which shifted attention
from ‘biosecurity’ towards the international control of
infectious diseases. Since then, the US has promoted
the concept of ‘One Health Security’, in which threats
posed by biological agents, whether naturally occurring
or man-made, are considered a security issue based on
the premise of ‘One Health’, in which human, animal
and ecosystem health are regarded as integral parts of
a single system.
While in theory the advances in genetic engineering
and synthetic biology in recent years could be used to
create more virulent or resistant strains of pathogens, or
even entirely synthetic biological agents, it is probably
more likely that a biosecurity threat will arise from an
accidental release, the risk of which has become greater
due to the increased manipulation of genetic materi-
als. Indeed, there have already been four incidents in
which the SARS virus leaked from laboratories. Two of
those incidents were at the same research laboratory in
Beijing, resulting in the quarantine of hundreds of peo-
ple, eight confirmed cases and one death.5
The Dual-use Dilemma
As genomics and synthetic biology inherently possess
dual-use characteristics, the challenge lies in promoting
Senator Patrick Leahy was the intended target of one of the
anthrax letters sent through the US postal system in 2001
(Photo by Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
10 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
legitimate scientific and commercial uses while pre-
venting malicious applications. In response to the
anthrax mail incidents of 2001, the US rapidly imple-
mented control measures to closely monitor and control
the number of researchers who had access to pathogens
and to ensure compliance with research ethics and
codes of conduct.
Scientists involved in synthetic biology in par-
ticular have been raising concerns about dual use for
at least 20 years. A significant milestone was the US
National Academies of Sciences’ 2004 publication
of ‘Biotechnology Research in an Age of Terrorism’,
referred to as the ‘Fink report’ because of the important
role played by the biologist Gerald R. Fink. 6 The Fink
report recognised that research into biotechnology car-
ries social responsibility, and underlined the need to
maintain a regulatory framework that would entail not
only responsible self-management by researchers and
research facilities, but also a responsible approach by
publishers, who should take into account any potential
risks arising from the dissemination of biotechnology
research, and by the governments and funding organi-
sations that support the research. Based on the propos-
als in the Fink report, the National Science Advisory
Board for Biosecurity (NSABB) was established in
the US as the main national body for examining the
potential for ‘misuse’ of research in the field of infec-
tious diseases. The Fink report remains an important
point of reference regarding the dual-use nature of life-
sciences technology, particularly research involving
infectious pathogens.
Following the Fink report, in 2005 the InterAcademy
Panel (since rebranded as the InterAcademy
Partnership, IAP), a global network of science, engi-
neering and medical academies, published the IAP
Statement on Biosecurity, proposing a code of conduct
for scientists that consisted of five aspects: (1) aware-
ness, (2) safety and security, (3) education and informa-
tion, (4) accountability, and (5) oversight.7
As biotechnology advances, many governments, in
addition to the US, are recognising its strategic impor-
tance. For example, China’s strategic biotechnology
programme aims to protect the country from poten-
tial biological threats and bolster its own technological
development.8 Recognising their dual-use nature, China
has also emphasised the importance of developing bio-
technologies for military applications, such as for bio-
logical defence and enhancing the physical capabilities
of soldiers.
In March 2024, the European Commission (EC) pub-
lished the communication ‘Building the Future with
Nature: Boosting Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing
in the EU’, which depicted biotechnology as one of ten
technological areas of particular importance to the secu-
rity of the European economy, due to its ‘enabling and
transformative nature, the potential risk of civil and
military fusion of some biotechnologies, and the risk of
their misuse for human rights violations’. 9 For this rea-
son, the EC and the EU member states are carrying out
an ongoing evaluation of the security risks associated
with biotechnology, including the potential for unau-
thorised access to these development capabilities.
Economic Security
Biotechnology will become increasingly important
to economic security as it is set to drive a worldwide
industrial revolution, with biomanufacturing poten-
tially accounting for one-third of global manufacturing
within the next ten years.10
The global biotechnology market, which was valued
at US$852.88 billion in 2020, is expected to be worth
around US$3.44 trillion by 2030. 11 The US held a domi-
nant position in the market in 2021, accounting for about
60% of its total value share, followed by the EU (12%) and
China (11%).12 Given the potential benefits of biotechnol-
ogy across many different sectors, there is a race to apply
it in ways that yield strategic advantage. The develop-
ment of biotechnology will lead to the expansion of
The European Commission is committed to boosting
biotechnology and biomanufacturing in the EU
(Photo by Thierry Monasse/Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 11
national biomanufacturing industries around the world,
and the wide range of innovations expected from the
convergence between biotechnology and other emerg-
ing technologies will add a degree of complexity and
tension to the strategic competition between those states.
Several countries – the US, Canada, China, Japan, South
Korea, Australia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa and some
in Latin America, plus the EU – are formulating national
strategies for the bioeconomy, aiming to use biotechnol-
ogy and biomass to help achieve sustainable economic
growth while also accelerating investment in biomedical
fields, strengthening agricultural production, and invest-
ing in and developing biosafety and quality assurance.
In the US, there was a recent significant devel-
opment in September 2022 when then-president
Joe Biden issued an executive order on Advancing
Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a
Sustainable, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy. 13
This represented an important step forward towards
a whole-of-government approach aimed at leveraging
biotechnology and biomanufacturing to boost the US
economy and strengthen national security, and can be
seen as an attempt to counter China’s growing capabili-
ties in this field. The specific objectives of the executive
order included strengthening the United States’ com-
petitiveness in biotechnology by investing in research
and innovation, as well as creating jobs in the sector.
In March 2023, the Office of Science and Technology
Policy published the report ‘Bold Goals for U.S.
Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing’, outlining six tar-
gets for the implementation of the 2022 executive order:
data protection, infrastructure development for bio-
manufacturing, development of human resources, reg-
ulatory clarity and efficiency, biosafety and biosecurity,
and international collaboration in research and devel-
opment.14 Achieving all of these goals and requirements
will indeed require a whole-of-government approach,
as well as public–private partnership efforts.
The EU has also adopted various strategies to foster
the development of biotechnology, aiming to ensure
that member states remain competitive in this area
while also addressing ethical, safety and regulatory
concerns. The European Parliament approved the first
European bioeconomy strategy in 2012, with a docu-
ment entitled ‘Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A
Bioeconomy for Europe’ that emphasised investment in
research, innovation and skills. 15 Updated in 2018, the
strategy document now reflects the EU’s climate and
biodiversity-conservation commitments, and empha-
sises sustainable biomass production, biodiversity
protection and bio-based innovation. 16 By integrating
biotechnology innovation into these strategies, the EU
is ensuring that economic growth and technological
progress contribute to environmental protection and
the sustainable use of natural resources.
Japan, meanwhile, drew up its first bioeconomy
strategy in 2019, setting the goal of becoming ‘the
world’s most advanced bioeconomy society’ by 2030. 17
The key elements of the strategy were sustainability, a
recycling-oriented society, and improved public health
through the wider use of biotechnology. More recently,
in June 2024, Japan formulated an updated bioeconomy
strategy that reflected the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic and the changing international situation in
Ukraine and the Middle East; the pursuit of carbon neu-
trality; the circular economy, including supply-chain
disruption and trade disputes; and the need to guar-
antee food and energy security. 18 The updated strategy
seeks to address the issues of Japan’s decreasing and
ageing population, and the country’s heavy reliance
on imports of food, energy, pharmaceuticals and sev-
eral other goods, while presenting a pathway to growth
through investment in science and innovation, includ-
ing in the biotechnology field.
Diffusion of Capabilities
The discovery in 2012 of CRISPR/Cas9, a versatile gene-
editing mechanism, has made it possible for laboratories
to edit almost any gene without requiring additional
specialised technology. With its lower cost and relative
accessibility, the CRISPR/Cas9 mechanism has spread
rapidly, catalysing a tenfold expansion in gene editing
worldwide since its discovery.19
Post-CRISPR/Cas9, genome editing has become even
more sophisticated. The latest CRISPR/Cas9-based
technologies can not only alter genomic DNA but also
the components that may affect gene expression, and
the range of applications is expanding. Other tools for
genome editing, not based on CRISPR/Cas9 technology,
have also developed in parallel.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
12 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
202420232022202120202019201820172016201520142013201220112010200920082007200620052004200320022001
Papers
*PubMed is a free database containing more than 37 million citations and abstracts of biomedical and life-sciences literature.
Source: Authors
Figure 2.1: Number of papers with the keywords ‘genome editing’ in the PubMed* database
Achieving meaningful results using genome-editing
tools currently requires expertise in molecular biology
and genetics, bioinformatics skills, and sophisticated
laboratory techniques. At the same time, data analysis
and interpretation are also needed, involving biostatis-
tics and advanced data-processing techniques. That is
why the most significant and reproducible results are
often achieved by interdisciplinary teams that combine
these skills.
However, the availability of genome-editing tools
is expected to increase significantly in the near future,
making it possible to achieve meaningful results with
less specialised knowledge. New bioinformatics tools
are already appearing that can be used effectively by
people with little bioinformatics training. In addi-
tion, the falling costs of genome editing are expected
to make it possible for small-scale laboratories, start-
up companies and universities to conduct genome-
editing research and applications that could previously
be undertaken only by institutions with greater finan-
cial resources. Currently, strict regulations – Biosafety
Levels 3 and 4, as defined by the World Health
Organization – are imposed on laboratories that handle
pathogens deemed to be highly infectious. So, in theory,
there is some level of oversight of access to higher-risk
pathogens. However, as genome-editing tools become
more accessible, clearer guidelines and policies are
needed, particularly for non-specialists and in less regu-
lated environments.
Lack of Controls: Ethics
The ability to engineer or manipulate life at the genomic
level has given rise to concerns about the impact of
editing the genomes of humans, where the safety
and reliability of genome editing has not been techni-
cally guaranteed. While this technology could be used
to intervene in fertilised human embryos to avoid
severe genetic diseases such as muscular dystrophy
or Huntington’s disease, there is not yet sufficient evi-
dence that such procedures will not have adverse effects
such as the activation of cancer genes or the knockout
of tumour-suppressor genes. 20 There are also con-
cerns that the expansion of gene editing could lead to
eugenics, and could have complex sociological implica-
tions for those future generations impacted by edited
human genomes.
Recognising the ethical implications of genome edit-
ing, the first International Summit on Human Genome
Editing convened prominent molecular biologists and
ethicists in Washington DC in 2015. 21 However, the
technological advances continued to be applied, and in
2018 a Chinese researcher, He Jiankui, controversially

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 13
announced at the Second International Summit on
Human Genome Editing that he had edited the genomes
of fertilised human embryos to prevent HIV. This was
seen as crossing a line, and in 2019 he was convicted
for violating medical regulations and imprisoned by the
Chinese government.22
Genome editing of fertilised human embryos has not
been approved anywhere. In 2020, a survey covering
106 countries showed that 96 of them had some form
of policy document (a law, regulation, guideline, code
or international treaty) relating to the use of genome
editing to modify early-stage human embryos, gametes
or their precursor cells.23 However, on the premise that
the embryo will not be returned to the uterus and will
not subsequently develop into a human, the process
is currently being carried out at the research level in
many countries.
If the current trajectory of technological development
continues, it may be possible to use genome editing in
clinical applications (for example, uterus transplants
of genome-edited babies) in the near future under the
premise of ‘treating serious genetic diseases’ rather
than pursuing any eugenic aim. While there is a need
for thorough discussion of the ethical aspects, there
are many medical professionals and pharmaceutical
companies who want to use this technology to develop
medical care. Given the potential to alleviate human suf-
fering from genetic diseases, it may prove difficult for
governments to maintain the argument for postponing
the application of genetic editing to clinical treatment.
Lack of Controls: Data Protection
Consumer genetic-testing and genome-analysis services
are also expanding through the direct-to-consumer
(DTC) model, where the leading companies include
23andMe, DNA4Life, Illumina and DNA Fit. The global
consumer genetic-testing market was estimated to be
worth almost US$2bn in 2023 and is expected to be
worth more than US$8bn by 2033. 24 There are limited
controls on these consumer genetic-testing services,
and on how their diagnoses are used. Often the tests are
carried out without the involvement of a medical pro-
fessional, so there is a risk that decisions will be made
without a scientific basis. And if the initial test results
are only representative of a specific group of people, or
if the sample size is not large enough, it will be neces-
sary to carry out further studies to ascertain whether the
initial results can be replicated.
In the US there are also cases where law-enforcement
agencies have used DTC genomic data to identify sus-
pects in criminal investigations. In such cases it is pos-
sible that there have been violations of the terms and
conditions for use of personal data (for example, that
it must be used only for the purpose for which it was
originally collected). There is an argument, however,
that the perceived public good should supersede pri-
vacy interests, which would allow courts to accept DTC
genomic data in law-enforcement investigations and
legal cases.
The question also arises of what happens to the DNA
information of customers if the DTCs involved in genetic
testing are acquired by other companies. This possibil-
ity was explored in November 2024 in the context of the
financial difficulties experienced by 23andMe, which
possesses a vast and highly valuable DNA database.25
DTC genetic testing is already regulated by law in
many developed countries, but in some others, such as
Japan, it remains subject only to guidelines. As single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) testing and sequenc-
ing analysis of the human genome has become available
in many research facilities and companies, the testing
work itself tends to be outsourced to low-cost compa-
nies, a significant proportion of which are located in
China.26 Against this backdrop, there are suspicions
that the genome-sequencing data of humans, animals
and plants is not being properly managed, and that
Chinese scientist He Jiankui at the Second International Summit
on Human Genome Editing in 2018
(Photo by S.C. Leung/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
14 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
information obtained through contract analysis is
being accumulated in China. The Biosecurity Law of
the People’s Republic of China, which came into effect
in 2021, has a strong focus on promoting research and
development in biotechnology and on strengthen-
ing the country’s biosecurity, but does not adequately
address ethical considerations or measures to ensure
transparency and a more equal global distribution of
the benefits of biotechnology.27
 That said, China has strict laws in place to regulate
the collection and export of genetic data, including its
2019 Administrative Regulations on Human Genetic
Resources.28 These laws require approval for the collection
of genetic data and restrict sharing with foreign entities.
China’s Personal Information Protection Law, enacted in
2021, also includes strong protections for personal data
and is similar to the General Data Protection Regulation
of the EU, which is one of the world’s strictest data-
protection laws and applies to DTC genetic-testing com-
panies operating in EU countries.29
Broadening Access
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed issues such as the
vaccine gap and the limited supply of therapeutic
drugs, which were largely due to delays within the
international information-sharing system, the disparity
in technological capabilities between countries, and the
fact that the provision of medical care relies on coun-
tries’ political stability and sanitary environment. The
pandemic showed the importance of sharing accurate
information internationally, of anticipating crises as
early as possible in order to take measures to contain
highly infectious diseases, and of political cooperation
and mutual support between affected countries.
It is possible that the benefits of biotechnology will be
distributed very unequally, reinforcing existing health
and economic disparities both between and within coun-
tries. To increase the chances of the benefits of advances
in genomic technology becoming much more widely
available, coordinated international action on issues
such as the privacy of genetic information, consent and
the potential for genetic discrimination will be needed.
And to deter the misuse of biotechnology in ways that
threaten individual privacy and human rights, robust
governance systems will also be necessary.
A direct-to-consumer DNA-testing kit produced by the
company 23andMe
(Photo by Tiffany Hagler-Geard/Bloomberg via Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 15
3. Looking Ahead
With the rapid development of biotechnology that
is set to take place in the next couple of decades, we
can expect groundbreaking developments to reshape
healthcare, agriculture, environmental management
and even human evolution. In medicine, improvements
in genetic diagnostic technology (polygenic risk scores,
for example) will allow for more accurate prediction of
disease occurrence, leading to advances in preventive
medicine. The development of drugs to treat cancers,
metabolic disorders and neurodegenerative diseases
will accelerate. The world’s three major infectious
diseases – malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS – should
be largely overcome, or at least the number of people
affected will decrease significantly.
Genome editing may also be used to manipulate ferti-
lised human embryos with the aim of combatting severe
genetic disorders, opening the way for its integration
into medical treatments and applications. However, the
debate on manipulating genomes for the enhancement
of certain traits will continue, probably with an increas-
ing focus on what restrictions should be imposed on
medical applications.
In agriculture, genome editing and other applications
of biotechnology will enable the efficient growth and
preservation of high-nutrition crops. Environmentally
friendly energy policies, such as the development of
biofuels, will progress. However, it is unclear whether
global warming can be significantly slowed.
Synthetic biology and bioengineering will continue
to progress, and scientists will be able to design com -
pletely new organisms with specific functions (such as
bacteria that produce biofuels), modify organisms, and
synthesise pharmaceuticals. Synthetic biology allows
for more targeted treatment of previously untreatable
diseases, such as certain cancers and genetic disorders,
with personalised drugs and cellular therapies tailored
to an individual’s genetic profile. On the other hand,
the ability to modify human cells raises ethical con-
cerns about human enhancement, leading to debates
about ‘designer babies’ and human genetic engineering.
Synthetic biology is currently in the research stage, with
examples of its capabilities being reported in leading
scientific journals. In future it is likely to contribute to
more accurate medical diagnoses, and to more effective
and less expensive treatments.
Releasing genetically engineered microbes into the
environment could also break down pollutants, clean
up oil spills, degrade plastic waste, and make the air,
soil and water cleaner. In addition, designing organ-
isms that absorb more carbon dioxide, and producing
biofuels to replace fossil fuels, could help combat cli-
mate change. On the other hand, the release of geneti-
cally engineered organisms into natural ecosystems
could have secondary ecological consequences, such as
spreading engineered traits to wildlife and unintention-
ally altering ecosystems.
In agriculture, crops genetically engineered to
increase productivity, pest resistance and climate-
change tolerance could help feed the rapidly growing
global population, especially in regions facing food
insecurity due to climate change. However, as is already
the case today, genetically modified organisms (GMOs)
may face resistance from the general public, and there
may be growing concerns over the monopolisation of
agricultural biotechnologies by large corporations.
Above all, synthetic biology raises concerns about
the misuse of GMOs for the manufacture of bioweap-
ons and for malicious purposes such as bioterrorism, as
the ability to custom design pathogens makes it easier
for malicious actors to create harmful biological agents.
But even in controlled laboratory environments there
is a risk of accidental release of synthetic organisms. If
these organisms spread in an uncontrolled way, they
can pose serious public-health and environmental risks.
Therefore, as synthetic biology becomes more potent,
there is a growing need for a robust international regu-
latory framework to manage risks and prevent abuse.
Synthetic biology has the potential to revolutionise
healthcare, agriculture, environmental management
and industry in the next 20 years or so, but in order for

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
16 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
it to benefit society as a whole, a balance must be struck
between the need for innovation on one hand and legiti-
mate concerns about safety, fairness and ethics on the
other. The US, China, several European countries and
some elsewhere, such as Australia, South Africa and
South Korea, are already investing heavily in the bioec-
onomy. The development of biotechnology innovations
(such as gene editing, synthetic biology and precision
medicine) will be one of the key elements in determin-
ing a country’s level of competitiveness. Countries will
continue to compete to attract the best talent in biotech-
nology, secure intellectual property rights and build
cutting-edge biotechnology industries.
Biotechnology is also closely linked to national secu-
rity, including economic security. The ability to rapidly
develop vaccines, counter bioterrorism and protect
against pandemics confers a strategic advantage.
Competition will also escalate over gene-editing tech-
nologies such as CRISPR and advances in bioengineer-
ing that could lead to military or dual-use technologies.
Genetic data is likely to become a strategic resource,
as countries with access to large genetic data sets will
be able to advance research in precision medicine,
gene therapy and population-level health monitoring.
Privacy and data-security concerns are likely to lead to
international competition over the collection, manage-
ment and ethical use of genetic information.
It is unclear how some countries will fare in this
competitive environment. In Japan, for example, there
are excellent research capabilities and government sup-
port in the biotechnology domain, but Japanese com -
panies face significant challenges when competing with
the world leaders, which are mostly in the US, the UK,
France, Germany and Switzerland, with China also on
the rise. The reasons for this include the lower pace of
innovation in Japan, lower risk tolerance in the invest-
ment culture, and issues related to the decreasing and
ageing population. If tensions between major world
powers increase, there is also a possibility of ‘biotech-
nology decoupling’, in which the supply chains for
important biological products such as vaccines, anti-
biotics and genetically modified crops are divided into
separate blocks.
The other side of the coin is that international coop-
eration in the field of biotechnology is also expected to
develop. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown the impor-
tance of international cooperation in vaccine develop-
ment and distribution. Biotechnology cooperation in
the context of pandemics, infectious diseases and drug-
resistant bacteria can become a major area of partner-
ship between countries, especially through global health
organisations such as the WHO and Gavi, the Vaccine
Alliance. There is also potential for countries to work
together to build more resilient global supply chains
for important biotechnology products such as vaccines,
diagnostic tools and therapeutic procedures. Multilateral
efforts to ensure equitable distribution of these products
could prevent competition from escalating into conflict.
Multilateral research initiatives in areas such as gene
therapy, cancer treatments and climate-resilient agricul-
ture could also promote international cooperation – as
did the Human Genome Project, which brought together
scientists from multiple countries. Above all, biotech-
nology is key to addressing global challenges such as
climate change and food security, so it could be hugely
beneficial if countries work together on biotechnology-
driven solutions such as climate-resilient crops and bio-
engineering algae to absorb carbon dioxide.
Addressing Weaknesses in
Existing Safeguards
The rapid advances in biotechnologies often outpace
the relevant regulatory frameworks, increasing the
risk of unintended consequences or deliberate misuse.
It is therefore necessary to enhance the global govern-
ance frameworks to monitor and control the use of
these technologies.
The Biological Weapons Convention
The BWC is a multilateral framework that prohibits the
use of biological agents as weapons. It bans biological
agents and toxins ‘of types and in quantities that have
no justification for prophylactic, protective or other
peaceful purposes’.30 Its Article X requires that the par-
ties to the convention cooperate for ‘peaceful purposes’,
although the precise criteria for those are not defined,
and stipulates that the convention should be imple-
mented in a way that does not hamper the economic or
technological development of states parties ‘in the field
of peaceful bacteriological (biological) activities’.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 17
However, the BWC does not provide verification
measures to confirm states parties’ compliance. There are
political reasons for this. The treaty was negotiated dur-
ing the Cold War between the US and the Soviet Union,
and verification measures – including intrusive on-site
inspections – were not acceptable at the time. 31 Indeed,
with no verification system in place, it has been revealed
that in the mid-1970s the Soviet Union was formulat-
ing a large-scale secret biological-weapons programme,
the Biopreparat, that used civilian research as a cover
and included work on weaponising pathogens such as
anthrax, smallpox, bubonic plague and tularemia.
Attempts were made during the period 1996–2001
to establish a verification system to ensure compliance
with the BWC, but no agreement was reached. Since
then, there have been further attempts to strengthen
the convention, such as through confidence-building
measures (CBMs), mechanisms for international coop-
eration and assistance, and mechanisms for review-
ing scientific and technological progress – but as none
of these are legally binding, their effectiveness is lim-
ited. Particularly since 2001, when the negotiation of a
legally binding verification system was halted, the util-
ity of CBMs has been emphasised as a means of at least
increasing the transparency of BWC implementation
by states parties. The number of countries submitting
CBM reports (see Figure 3.1) has been increasing over
the years, but because there is no legal obligation to do
so, the submission rate in 2023, the year with the high-
est number of submissions, was only 57% (105 out of
185 countries). Also, the contents of the CBM report
vary from country to country, making a standardised
evaluation impossible, so the submission of the CBM
report is not in itself an indication of the effectiveness of
BWC implementation.
At present, neither the states parties to the BWC nor
the United Nations, which supports the implemen-
tation of the BWC, are responding adequately to the
development of biotechnology. The stakeholders have
not agreed, for example, on the fundamental question
of whether the development of biotechnology should be
addressed as a security issue to be regulated within the
framework of disarmament and non-proliferation.
Meanwhile, the three BWC Review Conferences that
have taken place since 2011 have addressed the issue
of how to respond to research that raises dual-use
concerns (DURC). Scientific and technological devel-
opments with dual-use potential require continuous
checks and monitoring by experts, and the question of
who should be conducting such monitoring is being
discussed at the BWC, partly because there is no cer-
tainty about whether the scientists of the member states
Submissions
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
202420232022202120202019201820172016201520142013201220112010200920082007200620052004200320022001
Source: UNODA
Figure 3.1: Number of CBM reports submitted to the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA)
by states parties to the BWC

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
18 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
are truly independent of the political motivations of
their governments.
In addition to the review of scientific and techno-
logical progress, there has also been a long-standing
parallel discussion about the importance of education,
awareness and norms for scientists and researchers
directly involved in biotechnology research and devel-
opment that has dual-use potential. Within research
institutions, an increasing number of awareness sur-
veys have been conducted regarding the prohibition of
biological weapons and the non-proliferation of weap-
ons of mass destruction. In 2021, Tianjin University
in China, Johns Hopkins University in the US and the
InterAcademy Partnership (IAP) jointly created ‘The
Tianjin Biosecurity Guidelines for Codes of Conduct for
Scientists’, and efforts are being made to disseminate
these guidelines via the BWC Review Conferences. 32
The content of the guidelines is not political, but instead
presents principles supported by the IAP. Overall, this
is a notable example of a context where China and the
US can cooperate, at least at a peer-to-peer level.
UNSC Resolution 1540
While the BWC primarily focuses on prohibiting states
from using biological weapons, there is also UN Security
Council Resolution 1540, which was adopted by the UN
Security Council in 2004 as a framework for prevent-
ing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
with a particular focus on the dangers of such weapons
falling into the hands of non-state actors. 33 Resolution
1540 is the most universally applicable framework
that addresses the dangers of biological weapons, as
it obliges all UN member states to implement it under
Chapter VII of the UN Charter. Resolution 1540 serves
to reinforce the BWC by requiring all UN member states
to implement it, with implementation subsequently
reviewed by the 1540 Committee, a subsidiary body of
the Security Council. However, Resolution 1540 does
not define what constitutes a biological weapon, nor
does it indicate a common understanding of what kind
of legal framework is needed to prevent the prolifera-
tion of biological weapons to non-state actors. It only
obliges UN member states to develop legislation to pre-
vent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery to non-state actors, leaving
it up to the member states themselves to decide how
to do this. By not making a judgement on what should
be considered a biological weapon and controlled, and
how, Resolution 1540 leaves countries free to proceed
on the basis of their own level of scientific and techno-
logical development.
Nevertheless, Resolution 1540 provides a useful frame-
work for dealing with the dual-use issues arising from
recent developments in synthetic biology. In addition to
ensuring the effective control of biological substances,
it obliges countries to control flows of funds associated
with biotechnologies that raise dual-use concerns, and
enables more effective responses to those concerns.
Given the pace of biotechnological developments, the
traditional methods aimed at safely controlling micro-
organisms are no longer sufficient, and it is becoming
vital to ensure that genetic information and other data
are managed appropriately. Current information man-
agement in the biotechnology field includes publish-
ing research results in academic journals, presenting
at academic conferences, sharing information via the
internet, and sharing information among researchers
working in the same laboratories. But as many cutting-
edge research projects become more international and
interdisciplinary, and as the sources of funding and
investment become more diverse, the importance of
controlling the intangible transfer of technology and
information is being increasingly emphasised.
A comprehensive review of the national implemen-
tation of Resolution 1540 by UN member states, com-
piled in 2022, pointed out that the rapid development
of science and technology and the expansion of global
The UN Security Council unanimously adopts Resolution 2663
in November 2022
(Photo by Loey Felipe via UN Photo)

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 19
commerce have increased the risk of misuse or abuse
of the products resulting from technological progress.34
Following the comprehensive review, Security Council
Resolution 2663, adopted in November 2022, encour-
aged UN member states to take measures to control
the transfer of intangible technology and information
that have the potential to be used for weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery.35
A ‘Whole of Society’ Approach
There is widespread awareness that the possible appli-
cations of biotechnology give rise to ethical issues that
require a whole-of-society approach – a point made
clearly, for example, at an Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) conference
in 2021. 36 Such an approach would recognise that
technological innovation needs to be combined with
inclusive and responsible governance structures, tak-
ing into account ethical, social and environmental fac-
tors. In particular, the OECD conference advocated the
creation of a framework conducive to transparency,
social responsibility and fairness in the development
of emerging technologies that have significant social
impact, such as AI and biotechnology. The conference
stressed that a whole-of-society approach requires both
policy and social readiness, and that collaboration is
needed at the local, national and international levels
to promote transformative change in a sustainable and
socially responsible way.
Internationally, there is no consensus on regulat-
ing biotechnologies, as each country adopts its own
stance based on its cultural and ethical outlook. But in
order to prevent the misuse of such technologies while
promoting their peaceful application, it is essential to
strengthen international governance. This includes the
need for regulatory frameworks to prevent the military
diversion of technologies, and ensuring international
consistency in biosafety standards. It is also important
to establish a system in which researchers, govern-
ments and the private sector work together and share
ethical responsibilities.
When dealing with emerging technologies, expand-
ing the scope of governance is always a challenge.
Nowhere is this truer than in the case of biotechnol-
ogy, which, as we have seen, has wide-ranging security
implications. It does indeed appear to be the case that
the best way to tackle the problems it poses, and indeed
to grasp the benefits it offers, is to pursue an approach
that is multidisciplinary and includes all sections
of society.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
20 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Notes
1 D.G. Gibson et al., ‘Complete Chemical Synthesis, Assembly,
and Cloning of a Mycoplasma Genitalium Genome’, Science,
29 February 2008, pp. 1215–20.
2 Filippa Lentzos, ‘How to Protect the World from Ultra-
targeted Biological Weapons’, Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists, 7 December 2020, https://thebulletin.org/
premium/2020-12/how-to-protect-the-world-from-ultra-
targeted-biological-weapons/#post-heading.
3 James R. Clapper, ‘Statement for the Record: Worldwide
Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community’,
Senate Armed Services Committee, 9 February 2016.
4 Mark Wheelis, ‘Biological Warfare at the 1346 Siege of Caffa’,
Emerging Infectious Diseases, September 2002, pp. 971–5,
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/8/9/01-0536_article.
5 Robert Walgate, ‘SARS Escaped Beijing Lab Twice’, Genome
Biology, vol. 4, 27 April 2004, https://genomebiology.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/gb-spotlight-20040427-03.
6 National Research Council of the US National Academies of
Sciences, Committee on Research, Standards and Practices
to Prevent the Destructive Application of Biotechnology,
‘Biotechnology Research in an Age of Terrorism: Confronting
the Dual Use Dilemma’, Washington DC, 2004.
7 The InterAcademy Partnership, ‘IAP Statement on
Biosecurity’, December 2005, https://www.interacademies.
org/statement/iap-statement-biosecurity.
8 Cong Cao, ‘China’s Evolving Biosafety/Biosecurity
Legislations’, Journal of Law and the Biosciences, vol. 8, no.
1, June 2021, https://academic.oup.com/jlb/article/8/1/
lsab020/6311556.
9 European Commission, ‘Building the Future with Nature:
Boosting Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing in the EU’,
20 March 2024, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=celex:52024DC0137.
10 Congressional Research Service, ‘White House Initiative to
Advance the Bioeconomy’, 5 October 2022, https://crsreports.
congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R47274.
11 ‘Biotechnology Market Size to Worth [sic] Around US$ 3.44
Trillion by 2030’, BioSpace, 25 April 2022, https://www.
biospace.com/biotechnology-market-size-to-worth-around-
us-3-44-trillion-by-2030.
12 Statista, ‘Value Share of the Biotech Sector Worldwide as of
2021, by Country’, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1246614/
top-countries-share-of-global-biotech-value/.
13 Federal Register, ‘Executive Order on Advancing
Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a
Sustainable, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy’,
15 September 2022, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2022/09/15/2022-20167/advancing-biotechnology-
and-biomanufacturing-innovation-for-a-sustainable-safe-and-
secure-american.
14 US Department of Energy, ‘The White House Unveils New
Goals to Advance Biotechnology & Biomanufacturing’,29
March 2023, https://www.energy.gov/eere/bioenergy/articles/
white-house-unveils-new-goals-advance-biotechnology-
biomanufacturing.
15 European Commission, ‘Innovating for Sustainable Growth:
A Bioeconomy for Europe’, 2012, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:52012DC0060.
16 European Commission, ‘ A Sustainable Bioeconomy
for Europe: Strengthening the Connection Between
Economy, Society and the Environment’, October
2018, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52018DC0673.
17 EU–Japan Centre for Industrial Cooperation, ‘Japan
Bioeconomy Strategy’, https://www.eu-japan.eu/news/
japan-bioeconomy-strategy.
18 Japan, Cabinet Office, ‘Bioeconomy Strategy: Integrated
Innovation Strategy – Promotion Council Decision’, 3 June 2024,
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/bio/bio_economy_en.pdf.
19 Marin Jinek et al., ‘ A Programmable Dual-RNA-guided DNA
Endonuclease in Adaptive Bacterial Immunity’,Science, vol.
337, no. 6096, June 2012, https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/
science.1225829.
20 Jennifer A. Doudna, ‘The Promise and Challenge of
Therapeutic Genome Editing’, Nature, vol. 578,2020, https://
www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-1978-5.
21 The summit was modelled on the 1975 Asilomar Conference,
organised by researchers who had already realised the
dangers of recombinant DNA and temporarily suspended
their research to seek solutions. This laid the foundations for
the modern concept of biosafety.
22 Justin McCurry, ‘Scientist Who Gene-edited Babies is Back
in Lab and “Proud” of Past Work Despite Jailing’, Guardian,
1 April 2024, https://www.theguardian.com/science/2024/
apr/01/crispr-cas9-he-jiankui-genome-gene-editing-babies-
scientist-back-in-lab.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
The Security Implications of Developments in Biotechnology 21
23 Françoise Baylis et al., ‘Human Germ Line and Heritable
Genome Editing: The Global Policy Landscape’, The CRISPR
Journal, vol. 3, no. 5, October 2020, https://www.liebertpub.
com/doi/10.1089/crispr.2020.0082.
24 ‘Genome Editing Market Size to Reach USD 40.48 Billion by
2033’, BioSpace, 21 June 2024, https://www.biospace.com/
genome-editing-market-size-to-reach-usd-40-48-billion-
by-2033#:~:text=The%20U.S.%20genome%20editing%20
market,period%20of%202024%20to%202033.
25 Zoe Kleinman, ‘DNA-testing Site 23andMe Fights for
Survival’, BBC News, 3 November 2024, https://www.bbc.
com/news/articles/c4gm08nlxr3o.
26 Alex Philippidis, ‘Top 10 Sequencing Companies’,
Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology News, 9 April
2018, https://www.genengnews.com/topics/omics/
top-10-sequencing-companies-2/.
27 People’s Republic of China, National People’s Congress,
‘Biosecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China’, October
2020, http://en.npc.gov.cn.cdurl.cn/2020-10/17/c_703568.htm.
28 People’s Republic of China, State Council, ‘Regulations on
Management of Human Genetic Resources’, June 2019, http://
english.www.gov.cn/policies/latest_releases/2019/06/10/
content_281476708945462.htm.
29 ‘Personal Information Protection Law of the People’s Republic
of China’, https://personalinformationprotectionlaw.com/.
30 ‘Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on their Destruction’, BWC-text-English-1.pdf.
31 The Henry L. Stimson Center, ‘House of Cards: The Pivotal
Importance of a Technically Sound BWC Monitoring
Protocol’, Report no. 37, May 2001, https://www.stimson.
org/wp-content/files/file-attachments/Houseofcards_
complete_1.pdf.
32 Johns Hopkins University, Tianjin University and the
InterAcademy Partnership, ‘The Tianjin Biosecurity
Guidelines for Codes of Conduct for Scientists’, 2021, https://
www.interacademies.org/sites/default/files/2021-07/Tianjin-
Guidelines_210707.pdf.
33 United Nations, Security Council Resolution 1540, S/
RES/1540, 28 April 2004, https://documents.un.org/doc/
undoc/gen/n04/328/43/pdf/n0432843.pdf.
34 United Nations Security Council, ‘Letter Dated 29 November
2022 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
Established Pursuant to Resolution 1540 (2004) Addressed
to the President of the Security Council’, S/2022/899, 1
December 2022, https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/
n22/725/80/pdf/n2272580.pdf.
35 United Nations, Security Council Resolution 2663, S/
RES/2663, 30 November 2022, https://documents.un.org/doc/
undoc/gen/n22/716/75/pdf/n2271675.pdf.
36 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Working Party on Biotechnology, Nanotechnology and
Converging Technologies, ‘Conference Proceedings:
Technology in and for Society: Innovating Well for Inclusive
Transitions’, December 2021, https://one.oecd.org/document/
DSTI/STP/BNCT(2022)14/FINAL/en/pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
22 The International Institute for Strategic Studies

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
© The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2025
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – UK
Arundel House | 6 Temple Place | London | wc2r 2pg | UK
t. +44 (0) 20 7379 7676 e. iiss@iiss.org www.iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Americas
2121 K Street, NW | Suite 600 | Washington DC 20037 | USA
t. +1 202 659 1490 e. iiss-americas@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Asia
9 Raffles Place | #49-01 Republic Plaza | Singapore 048619
t. +65 6499 0055 e. iiss-asia@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Europe
Pariser Platz 6A | 10117 Berlin | Germany
t. +49 30 311 99 300 e. iiss-europe@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Middle East
14th floor, GFH Tower | Bahrain Financial Harbour | Manama | Kingdom of Bahrain
t. +973 1718 1155 e. iiss-middleeast@iiss.org
