
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
JANUARY 2025
Biopower
Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Vivek Chilukuri and Hannah Kelley

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the Authors
Vivek Chilukuri is the senior fellow and
program director of the Technology and
National Security Program at Center for a
New American Security (CNAS). His work
focuses on the responsible development
and deployment of artificial intelligence; the
U.S.-China technology competition; and the intersection
of technology, democracy, and geopolitics. Before joining
CNAS, Chilukuri served as a senior technology policy
advisor, deputy chief of staff, and legislative director for
Senator Michael Bennet (D-CO)—a member of the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence. Previously, Chilukuri
served at the Department of State as a policy advisor to
the undersecretary for civilian security, democracy, and
human rights, and as a program officer at the National
Democratic Institute. He received a master in public policy
from the Harvard Kennedy School and a bachelor of arts in
international studies from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, where he graduated as a Robertson Scholar.
Hannah Kelley is a policy advisor at the
National Security Commission on Emerging
Biotechnology (NSCEB) and a former
research associate with the Technology and
National Security Program at CNAS. Her work
at CNAS focused on U.S. national technology
strategy and international cooperation on responsible
technology use. Kelley helped launch and run the CNAS Task
Force on Biotechnology and American Competitiveness.
Before joining CNAS, Kelley interned with the Permanent
Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations,
the International Rescue Committee Atlanta, and the U.S.
Department of Commerce. She holds both a master of
international policy and a bachelor of arts in international
affairs from the University of Georgia School of Public and
International Affairs.
Kelley contributed to this report before she began her
current role at the NSCEB. This work represents her views
and positions, and not necessarily the views and positions of
the NSCEB or its Commissioners.
About the Technology and National
Security Program
The CNAS Technology and National Security Program
produces cutting-edge research and recommendations
to help U.S. and allied policymakers responsibly win
and manage the great power competition with China
over critical and emerging technologies. The escalating
U.S.-China competition in artificial intelligence (AI),
biotechnologies, next-generation information and
communications technologies, digital infrastructure, and
quantum information sciences will have far-reaching
implications for U.S. foreign policy and national and
economic security. The Technology and National Security
Program focuses on high-impact technology areas with in-
depth, evidence-based analysis to assess U.S. leadership vis-
à-vis China, anticipate technology-related risks to security
and democratic values, and outline bold but actionable
steps for policymakers to lead the way in responsible
technology development, adoption, and governance. A
key focus of the Tech Program is to bring together the
technology and policy communities to better understand
these challenges and together develop solutions.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Dr. Michelle Holko, Dr. David
Markowitz, Dr. Ali Nouri, and Dr. Anne Cheever for their
valuable input on earlier drafts of this report. They would
also like to thank members of the CNAS Task Force on
Biotechnology and American Competitiveness, who shared
their perspectives over several workshops and discussions
that helped inform this report. Finally, this report would not
have been possible without invaluable contributions from
our CNAS colleagues, including Hilal Aka, Constanza Vidal
Bustamante, Maura McCarthy, Melody Cook, Caroline Steel,
and Emma Swislow.
This report was made possible with general support to
CNAS. As a research and policy institution committed
to the highest standards of organizational, intellectual,
and personal integrity, CNAS maintains strict intellectual
independence and sole editorial direction and control over
its ideas, projects, publications, events, and other research
activities. CNAS does not take institutional positions on
policy issues and the content of CNAS publications reflects
the views of their authors alone. In keeping with its mission
and values, CNAS does not engage in lobbying activity and
complies fully with all applicable federal, state, and local
laws. CNAS will not engage in any representational activities
or advocacy on behalf of any entities or interests and, to
the extent that the Center accepts funding from non-U.S.
sources, its activities will be limited to bona fide scholastic,
academic, and research-related activities, consistent with
applicable federal law. The Center publicly acknowledges on
its website annually all donors who contribute.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
01 Executive Summary
05 CHAPTER 01
 The Biorevolution
 07 Biotechnology, Biomanufacturing, and the Bioeconomy
 08 Key Trends and Technologies
 10 The National Security Case for U.S. Biotechnology Leadership
13 CHAPTER 02
 The State of American Biopower
14 U.S. Biotechnology Policy from Reagan to Biden
19 American Biopower: Tailwinds
22 American Biopower: Headwinds
31 CHAPTER 03
 Biopower Abroad
32 Global Architecture
33 Bilateral, Plurilateral, and Regional Initiatives
34 A Survey of Global Biopowers
42 China: The Rising Biopower
48 Recommendations
61 Conclusion
62 Appendix: Cost Justification
 for Recommendations
 Table of Contents

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
11
 Executive
 Summary
Cutting-edge biotechnologies
will create organs, capture
carbon emissions, restore
polluted environments, tailor
medicines to a person’s genes,
and replace vulnerable supply
chains for food, fuel, fabrics,
and firepower with domestic
biobased alternatives.
The biorevolution is upon us. Converging breakthroughs
in biological sequencing, engineering biology, and
machine learning are ushering in an almost science
fiction–like world in which humans can manipulate and
even design the building blocks of life with increasing
sophistication—for good or ill. In this world, cutting-edge
biotechnologies will create organs, capture carbon emis-
sions, restore polluted environments, tailor medicines to
a person’s genes, and replace vulnerable supply chains
for food, fuel, fabrics, and firepower with domestic
biobased alternatives. According to one estimate, existing
biotechnologies could have a direct economic impact
of $4 trillion a year for the next 20 years.1 As innovation
continues, the ceiling could be far higher.
If next-generation biotechnologies hold great
promise, they also come with gathering perils from new
bioweapons, intrusive biosurveillance, and the race
for biotechnology breakthroughs without adequate
safeguards for public health, the environment, and
democratic values. For policymakers, the question is not
whether the biorevolution has transformative power,
but which nation will responsibly harness that power
to unlock new tools for defense, health, manufacturing,
food security, environmental remediation, and the fight
against climate change. No country is better positioned
to lead the biorevolution than the United States, but it
requires that policymakers act now with swift, ambitious,
and far-sighted steps to secure America’s place as the
global biopower.
The United States enters the biorevolution with for-
midable tailwinds—an unrivaled innovation ecosystem,
world-leading research institutes, unmatched private
investment, talent, and a global network of democratic
partners and allies. Recent federal investments and an

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
@CNASDC
2
scholars rank second in the world for authoring biomed-
ical papers, and the country leads high-impact research
in biofuels and biomanufacturing. China’s high-impact
research in synthetic biology is more than triple that of
the United States, posing a high risk of monopolization.7
Today, China is a global biomanufacturing powerhouse
that exports roughly 40 percent of the world’s active
pharmaceutical ingredients.8 Now, China aspires to
move up the biotechnology value chain with a renewed
push to support start-ups, integrate its vast biodata with
cutting-edge machine learning tools, and dominate
emerging markets for biotechnology with “national
champions” such as BGI Group and WuXi Biologics, as it
did with Huawei and 5G.
China’s ambition to close the gap with the United
States should inspire action from policymakers to secure
and extend America’s lead. To that end, this report
outlines a series of immediate and longer-term
recommendations in six key areas for leaders in poli-
cymaking and industry:

Invest in Research
and Infrastructure

While the private sector largely drives biotechnology
innovation, federal support is vital to general biotech-
nology R&D—especially in applications beyond health
and medicine. To level up American biopower, policy-
makers should significantly expand public investment
in biotechnology-related research, development, and
infrastructure through the Department of Defense,
Department of Energy, National Science Foundation,
National Institutes of Health, and National Institute
of Standards and Technology and support agen-
cy-led efforts to realize the March 2023 Bold Goals for
Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing. Wherever possible,
investments should seek to close the gap between the
biomedical and biopharmaceutical sectors—which
receive the lion’s share of public and private investment—
and other promising biotechnology applications in areas
such as defense, energy, and manufacturing. At the same
time, the federal government should better coordinate
and strategically target existing and future investments
in general and applied biotechnology research. Finally,
emerging policy framework have fortified U.S. leader-
ship. But in this fast-moving field, settling for gradual
progress will guarantee falling behind as competitors like
China race to eclipse the United States with ambitions to
scale up their biotechnology research, innovation, talent,
and infrastructure.
To secure America’s place as the global biopower, the
next administration and Congress should accelerate U.S.
tailwinds through greater investment in biotechnology
research and infrastructure, especially in sectors beyond
health and medicine; expand the pipeline of biotalent;
and lead globally to drive biotechnology norms, stan-
dards-setting, and responsible adoption. At the same
time, policymakers must navigate headwinds that
could imperil further progress—specifically, an under-
developed national biomanufacturing infrastructure;
insufficient public and private investment that flows
overwhelmingly to biotechnology research and devel-
opment (R&D) in the health and medical sectors; a lack
of uniform federal standards, definitions, and codes; a
morass of conflicting policies and regulations; inacces-
sible and insecure biodata; and low public awareness and
trust in emerging and ethically fraught biotechnology
applications. This report outlines several recommenda-
tions to shore up America’s position as the preeminent
biopower, including an investment of $20 billion in new
federal funding. Policymakers should view this level of
investment as the floor of what it will require to secure
U.S. biotechnology leadership.
Regardless of what U.S. policymakers do, countries
around the world are moving swiftly to embrace the
biorevolution. The United Kingdom (UK) is driving inno-
vation by concentrating and sharing its biodata through
the UK Biobank, which houses the fully sequenced
genetic codes of 500,000 people.2 France has invested
roughly $9.5 billion through Innovation Santé 2030 to
drive biomedical research.3 Japan has committed $3
billion to promote its biotechnology ecosystem.4 South
Korea is carving out a niche in digital biotechnology
and aims to transition 30 percent of its manufacturing
industry to biomanufacturing within a decade.5
If any nation can surpass the United States as the
global biopower, it will be China. In its most recent
five-year plans, Beijing made explicit its ambition to
become a biotechnology “superpower.” It is well on its
way. China’s biotechnology leadership has surged on the
back of significant public investment, long-term policy
prioritization, a massive domestic market, decades of
largely unrestricted capital flows, and the amassing of
biodata through licit and illicit means.6 China’s con-
certed biotechnology push has already paid dividends: its

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
3
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
policymakers should consider financial and tax incen-
tives to attract private capital to sustain biotechnology
ventures across the Valley of Death, with a focus on bio-
technology ventures in defense, manufacturing, energy,
and agriculture.

Expand Biotalent

American biopower hinges on world-class biotalent
in government, academia, and industry. Although the
United States has a relative advantage in access to
top STEM talent, it still faces a shortage that impedes
progress. Industry should intensify engagement with
secondary and postsecondary educational institutions
to build early interest in biotechnology careers, expand
internship and apprenticeship opportunities, and
align curricula with anticipated biotechnology jobs.
Policymakers should also pursue targeted immigration
reform to supercharge the flow of top biotalent to U.S.
research institutions and companies—paired with efforts
to shore up research security—while acting to broaden
biotalent and bioliteracy across government by lever-
aging initiatives such as the Presidential Innovation
Fellowship and the U.S. Digital Service.

Unlock Biodata
Biotech leadership hinges on secure, quality biodata.
However, biodata is too often segmented and seques-
tered in public and private labs according to different
protocols with incompatible systems. Policymakers
should clarify and modernize regulations for the use of
artificial intelligence–ready health and genomic data for
biotechnology research; invest in privacy-preserving and
privacy-enhancing technology to promote large-scale
biodata analysis while respecting privacy; establish a
new American Biobank modeled on the successful UK
Biobank; and fortify the cybersecurity of biodata reposi-
tories in government and private hospitals and clinics.
Strengthen and
Streamline Policy
To the extent they exist, biotechnology standards, defi-
nitions, and regulations are outdated, inconsistent, and
incoherent—sapping innovation. Policymakers should
require a government-wide survey to identify regulatory
gaps and develop uniform federal definitions, standards,
and codes for biotechnology and the bioeconomy to
improve tracking, measurement, and coordination.
They should also establish a consolidated federal office
to provide a single point of entry for biotechnology
regulations and direct most federal agencies to develop
strategies for aligning their various programs, invest-
ments, and outreach to drive responsible biotechnology
innovation and broader biotechnology competitiveness.

Lead Globally
The United States should fully exercise its global lead-
ership to shape the future of biotechnology. As with
artificial intelligence (AI), Washington’s decisions in
the next few years could determine whether next-gen-
eration biotechnologies will reflect democratic values
or techno-authoritarianism. To that end, policymakers
should convene a global Biotechnology Safety and
Opportunity Summit modeled after the success of the
UK’s 2023 Bletchley AI Safety Summit; set a global
example by declaring red lines for unacceptable biotech-
nology research and applications; and develop a strategy
for biotechnology standards-setting and joint research
through existing partnerships such as the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO); the Australia, United
Kingdom, and United States trilateral security partner-
ship (AUKUS); and the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue
(the Quad).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
@CNASDC
4
Build Public Trust

Strong and sustained U.S. biotechnology leadership
requires enduring support from policymakers and the
public. However, both groups remain broadly unaware
of the looming biorevolution and its consequences for
America’s economy, security, and values. To elevate and
broaden the debate, industry should hold a national
summit on the bioeconomy to make the case for why
biotechnology leadership is essential to U.S. national,
health, and economic security, and highlight biotech-
nology’s positive applications. Senior executive branch
leaders should crisscross the country and make the case
for U.S. biotechnology leadership. For its part, Congress
should hold regular biotechnology hearings and engage
constituents to boost awareness among public and
elected officials.
The biorevolution holds great promise and risk, and the
ultimate balance will hinge largely on America’s choices
in the coming years. Policymakers must embrace the
biorevolution with ambition and humility, acting boldly
to drive research, innovation, and infrastructure across
the full spectrum of biotechnologies; reform policy; train,
attract, and retain biotalent; responsibly unlock biodata;
leverage global partnerships; and earn public trust. The
United States led the 20th century in biotechnology, and
there is no reason it cannot lead the 21st as the preemi-
nent global biopower.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
The Biorevolution
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Chapter 01

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
@CNASDC
6
6
I
f the 20th century saw the Information Revolution,
the 21st is witnessing the biorevolution—a dizzying
future in which humanity can design and manipulate
the building blocks of life with greater precision, for good
or ill. Propelled by converging breakthroughs in syn-
thetic biology, biological engineering, biocomputing, and
more, the biorevolution will have far-reaching conse-
quences for the global economic and security landscape,
even if those impacts remain poorly understood by poli-
cymakers and the public.
The biorevolution rests on a powerful and unsettling
truth: the building blocks of life, such as DNA and RNA,
are programmable. With emerging biotechnologies and
techniques, humans can now shape life for our ends
with increasing sophistication—with the potential for
better crops, livestock, materials, medicines, and man-
ufacturing, along with powerful new tools to promote
food and energy security, power the economy, safeguard
the environment, and protect Americans from future
pandemics and biothreats. Biology is transitioning from a
longtime scientific discipline of observation and mea-
surement to a domain of human design.9
The United States has pushed the frontier of biotech-
nology for decades. In the 1970s, American scientists
developed recombinant DNA technology, unlocking
medical advances such as monoclonal antibodies and
insulin treatments for diabetes.10 In the 1980s, American
biochemist Kary Mullis developed the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)—a foundational tool in modern genetics
that allows researchers to reproduce DNA sequences.11
Between 1990 and 2003, America spearheaded the
Human Genome Project, a landmark scientific collabo-
ration that generated the first nearly complete sequence
of all three billion base pairs of the human genome.12
A decade later, Jennifer Doudna earned a Nobel Prize
for helping to pioneer gene editing technology with
CRISPR-Cas9.13 More recently, Drew Weissman helped
lay the groundwork for the mRNA (messenger RNA)
COVID-19 vaccine, which saved millions of lives.14
Although the United States led the world in bio-
technology in the 20th century, there is no guarantee it
will remain the global biopower in the 21st. America’s
competitors, especially China, grasp biotechnology’s
potential to enhance economic and military power and
have moved proactively to realize it. In fact, China has
already surpassed the United States in trials for CAR
T-cell therapy—a promising cancer treatment.15 As the
world’s current biotechnology leader, the United States
still enjoys the strongest hand to become the 21st century
biopower, propelled by natural tailwinds from its inno-
vative private sector, premier research institutions, and
dynamic capital markets. These advantages are no reason
for the United States to rest on its laurels. Ambitious
competitors and gathering domestic headwinds risk
seriously eroding U.S. biotechnology leadership without
significant changes to policies and investments today.
At a time when many emerging technologies compete
for limited attention and resources, there is value in
clarifying the benefits of U.S. biotechnology leadership
and the dangers of ceding it to competitors. This report
will make the national and economic security case for
U.S. biotechnology leadership; review the history, recent
developments, and priority issues in U.S. biotechnology
With emerging biotechnologies and
techniques, humans can now shape
life for our ends with increasing
sophistication.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
7
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
biological resources, even if they do not use biotechnol-
ogies.17 According the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), in 2016, the
bioeconomy accounted for more than 5 percent of the
U.S. gross domestic product (GDP)—nearly $1 trillion.18
An estimate from McKinsey & Company predicts that
biological processes could generate up to 60 percent of
all physical inputs in the global economy, with a direct
economic impact of up to $4 trillion annually between
2030 and 2040.19
Historically, discussion of biotechnology and the
bioeconomy tends to focus on research, development,
and applications in the health, medical, and pharmaceu-
tical sectors—reflecting biotechnology’s overwhelming
share of public and private investment and activity. This
report, however, will embrace a broader conception of
biotechnology and the bioeconomy to reference the full
spectrum of applications in health, energy, agriculture,
and defense.
Biotechnology-enabled mRNA vaccines saved millions of lives in the United States and trillions of dollars in further economic harm .
(Morsa Images via Getty Images)
policy; identify tailwinds and headwinds to U.S. biotech-
nology leadership; and assess biotechnology-leading
nations abroad, from close partners to strategic com-
petitors such as China. Finally, the report will outline
recommendations in six key areas to secure America’s
place as the 21st century biopower.
Biotechnology, Biomanufacturing,
and the Bioeconomy
Biotechnology’s cross-cutting breadth, rapid advance-
ments, and technical complexity can make it hard for
policymakers and the public to grasp. In its simplest
form, biotechnology is the manipulation of biology to
create services and products. These range from precision
medicine tailored to an individual’s DNA to genetically
engineered crops that better resist drought and disease
to alternative proteins; mRNA vaccines; and biobased
armor, resins, fabrics, and fuel. If “biotechnology”
captures the range of technology-based techniques
and tools, then “biomanufacturing” is its application
to create specific products.16 By extension, the term
“bioeconomy” captures the economic activity generated
from every product, service, and process derived from
In its simplest form, biotechnology is
the manipulation of biology to create
services and products.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
@CNASDC
88
The world has already reaped many benefits from the
biorevolution, from genetically engineered crops that are
hardier and more nutritious to stem cell treatments for
leukemia and sickle cell anemia to advanced biofuels that
have boosted energy security and reduced carbon emissions.
It took the Human Genome Project 13 years and $2.7 billion
to sequence the human genome.20 Today, cutting-edge
machines can do this in less than a day, for less than $1,000—
and by the end of the decade, perhaps, for less than $100.21
The COVID-19 pandemic exacted a terrible toll—more
than 1.5 million American lives lost and $5 trillion in federal
spending—but it is worth imagining how much worse it
would have been without biotechnology-enabled vaccines
and the biotechnology-powered ability to sequence the virus
within weeks.22 The pandemic was a painful but powerful
demonstration of biotechnology’s power to save millions of
lives and trillions of dollars.

Key Definitions

Biotechnology: Technology that manipulates
biology to create products and services, such as
gene editing.
Biomanufacturing: The application of
biotechnology-based techniques and tools to
create specific products, such as biobased armor,
fabrics, and fuel.
Bioeconomy: The economic activity generated
from every product, service, and process derived
from biological resources, even if it does not use
biotechnologies.
Key Trends and Technologies
Although the biorevolution has gathered momentum
for years, several converging trends will continue its
acceleration: the collapsing cost of computing power,
gene sequencing, and gene synthesis; the increasing
sophistication and digitization of medical testing and
records, which will dramatically expand biodata; and the
rise of powerful artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning tools. These trends have combined to give scien-
tists and industries more biodata to analyze at lower cost
and with greater power and precision.
These converging trends have powered biotechnology
breakthroughs in several areas. Although detailing
each breakthrough is beyond the scope of this report,
policymakers should pay particular attention to devel-
opments in three key, often overlapping, areas: biological
sequencing, engineering biology/synthetic biology, and
human-machine interfaces.23
Biological sequencing. This field includes efforts
to map, measure, and analyze biological molecules
and pathways. The most consequential subset is the
sequencing of genes, the instructions for building and
maintaining the cells in living organisms. When arranged
in a sequence, genes form strands of DNA, one of the
building blocks of life. Advances in biological sequencing
therefore bestow greater insights into the design and
function of life, with far-reaching applications, from
understanding novel biothreats, such as the COVID-19
virus, to developing personalized medicine to designing
new biobased materials and manufacturing processes.
Other promising subfields include the sequencing of
proteins, metabolites, the microbiome, and RNA tran-
scripts—the molecules that help regulate the flow of
genetic information within cells.
Engineering biology/synthetic biology. These terms
are often used interchangeably, but they have important
distinctions. Whereas engineering biology is the appli-
cation of engineering principles to existing biological
systems to develop products, synthetic biology uses
modern biotechnologies and techniques to create entirely
novel biological systems. For example, manipulating
the DNA of a cotton plant would fall under engineering
biology, while synthetic biology would entail designing
the DNA of a new and improved cotton plant de novo.
Biological engineering spans revolutionary gene
editing technologies from CRISPR and TALEN to the
Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna COVID-19 vaccines,
which use mRNA technology.24 Applications include
lab-grown meat and bioengineered materials such as
plant-based fibers, polymers, and coatings.
The pandemic was a painful
but powerful demonstration of
biotechnology’s power to save millions
of lives and trillions of dollars.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
9
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
a neural chip, and it won’t be the last.35 In September
2024, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
cleared Neuralink’s Blindsight device, which Musk
claims could one day restore limited vision to certain
people who are blind, for accelerated development.36 In
time, biotechnology may be able to restore sight, hearing,
and movement for millions—improving quality of life
and productivity.
Developments in these three areas—biological
sequencing, biological engineering/synthetic biology,
and human-machine interfaces—will converge with
other technology trends, especially the rapid expansion
of advanced computing power and advanced AI tools
and automation. According to AI research organization
Epoch AI, from 1950 to 2010, it took almost two years to
double computing power. But since 2010, it now takes
only six months.37 Today, computing costs are up to 1,000
times cheaper than they were two decades ago.38 New
machine learning techniques combined with the pro-
liferation of biodata could allow researchers to extract
transformative insights in health, medicine, agriculture,
energy, and more.
Engineering biology techniques are also increas-
ingly used to enhance regenerative medicine, which
involves repairing, replacing, or regenerating damaged
cells, tissues, and organs.25 Among the most promising
advances in regenerative medicine is stem cell research,
in which scientists use stem cells to 3-D print organic
tissue and biobased materials.26 In a decade or more,
some experts envision a world of 3-D printed organs
for human transplant.27 In fact, British doctors have
already successfully implanted a 3-D printed eye in a
patient and 3-D printed bladders that saved the lives
of three children.28
Biological engineering and synthetic biology hold
immense potential. Future breakthroughs could allow
societies to complement chemical- and petroleum-based
materials with bioengineered materials with a lower
environmental impact, just as they could complement
conventional, carbon-intensive meats with lab-grown
alternatives. They could provide healthy lungs, livers,
kidneys, eyes, and other organs to any patient who needs
them, and replace or regenerate diseased cells to treat
sickle cell anemia and cardiovascular disease.29 None of
these breakthroughs are imminent; indeed, some may be
decades away. But given their potential, companies and
countries would be unwise to ignore them.
Human-machine interfaces. This field sits at the
intersection of organic biosystems (such as human
organs) and inorganic systems (such as software and
hardware). The most common applications are in
the medical field, in which devices can create one- or
two-way communications with parts of the body. For
example, doctors can now place sensors on the scalp or
implant them on the brain (“brain-computer interface”)
to read a patient’s neural signals and control a robotic
arm or a device cursor.30 Other biomachines can send
electronic signals to the brain (“deep brain stimulation”)
to modulate unusual neural activity and help manage
the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, or to help treat
attention deficit disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder,
and severe depression.31 Similarly, a cochlear implant in
the ear sends electronic signals to stimulate the auditory
nerve and improve hearing.32 Although this field has seen
less progress than biological sequencing and biolog-
ical engineering, there is growing potential for medical
applications. These include neuroprosthetics to restore
lost senses through technologies such as bionic vision, or
technologies to direct a prosthetic limb with signals from
the brain.33 Last year, Elon Musk’s company Neuralink
made headlines for successfully implanting a chip onto
a patient’s brain, reportedly restoring some mobility.34
Neuralink was not the first successful implantation of

Key Fields in Biotechnology

Biological sequencing: Efforts to map, measure,
and analyze biological molecules and pathways.
This includes sequencing not only genes but also
proteins, metabolites, and RNA transcripts.
Engineering biology/synthetic biology:
Engineering biology is the application of
engineering principles to existing biological
systems to develop products. Synthetic biology
uses modern biotechnologies and techniques to
create entirely novel biological systems.
Human-machine interfaces: This field sits at
the intersection of organic biosystems, such as
organs, and inorganic systems, such as software
and hardware. This field includes devices that
can create one- or two-way communication with
parts of the body, such as Neuralink.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
@CNASDC
10
@CNASDC
10
The National Security Case for
U.S. Biotechnology Leadership
As with any technological breakthrough, bad actors will
seize on the biorevolution’s new tools and capabilities
for their own nefarious ends. The same techniques that
can sequence a deadly virus to develop a vaccine could
also reveal how to make that virus even deadlier. The
techniques to genetically manipulate staple crops to
make them more resilient could yield insights about how
to destroy them. The power to manipulate life inevitably
unlocks the power to destroy it. Beyond direct threats to
human security lie more fundamental questions about
the dangers and ethics of “playing God” by treating DNA
and RNA—the building blocks of life itself—as little more
than computer code to manipulate for human ends.
Any qualms about the biorevolution should be
tempered with the reality of its arrival. It is not a
question of whether the biorevolution will happen, but
which nations will lead it, shape it, and reap its benefits.
The United States continues to lead the world in bio-
technology, but China races to close the gap. Beijing has
named biotechnology a strategic emerging industry,
and it has already hit its 10-year targets. According to
some estimates, China has invested up to $100 billion
in life sciences research and development (R&D) at the
local, provincial, and national levels.39 Leading Chinese
biotechnology companies are also amassing vast genomic
and health data, and the government’s prioritization of
the sector has offered a strong signal for research and
market investment.40
It is not realistic for the United States to out-compete
China in every sector. Federal actions to protect and
support certain sectors require a clear-eyed assessment
of their importance to national security. The national
security case for U.S. biotechnology leadership rests on
five core arguments.
First, a strong biotechnology sector will better protect
the nation’s citizens and economy from new pandemics
and biothreats—both natural and human created. The
COVID-19 pandemic painfully underscored the danger
of unchecked viruses to the safety of America’s citizens
and economy. A robust biotechnology sector will put
the United States in a stronger position to anticipate,
prevent, and mitigate future outbreaks and biothreats
with the latest tools for virus detection, sequencing, and
vaccine development. To weigh the value of a robust
domestic biotechnology sector, consider a world in
which the United States must rely on China for life-
saving vaccines for the next pandemic or a neglected U.S.
biotechnology sector can only produce those vaccines
months—or even years—later than foreign competitors.
Beyond this, biotechnology has the potential to deliver
breakthroughs to restore vision, sight, and movement
through neuroprosthetics; tailored wellness and dieting
regimes through personalized medicine; and precision
treatments for sickle cell anemia and cardiovascular
disease to improve the longevity, health, and productivity
of Americans. Embracing the biorevolution could also
avoid a future in which the United States must rely on
competitors such as China for mission-critical materials
for the U.S. military, clean energy breakthroughs, or
cutting-edge tools to protect its population from novel
pandemics and biothreats.41
Second, ceding the biorevolution to competitors risks
depriving the United States of potentially transformative
defense applications. Breakthroughs in biotechnology
could provide renewable sources of jet fuel.42 They
could promote the physical and mental health of service
members through products that help balance their
microbiomes, enable self-repairing airfields with “living
concrete” full of bacteria that regenerate to fill cracks
as they emerge, and better protect soldiers with armor
made of “dragon silk”—a genetically engineered spider
silk that is not only lighter but up to three times tougher
than traditional Kevlar.43 The U.S. Department of Defense
(DoD) could employ new, lighter, and flame-retardant
biological resins to improve the designs of drones, ships,
and aircraft.44 Biological sensors could provide real-
time alerts to hazardous biological or chemical agents.45
Researchers have manipulated the E. coli bacteria into
a biosensor that can detect unexploded ordnance,
reducing risks to both service members and civilians.46
Biotechnology’s defense applications are as far ranging as
the field itself.47
Third, the biorevolution will bestow significant
economic benefits to nations that harness it. Like AI,
biotechnology could level up major sectors of the
economy—from agriculture and pharmaceuticals to
textiles, energy, and manufacturing. If the United States
fails to invest in biotechnology, it risks missing out on the
new tools, processes, and productivity it could unlock—
and the billions, even trillions, of dollars in economic
benefit. McKinsey & Company forecasts that existing
biotechnology applications could have up to $4 trillion in
annual, direct economic impact over the next 20 years.48
The power to manipulate life inevitably
unlocks the power to destroy it.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
11
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
In addition, the World BioEconomy Forum estimates
that the broad adoption of synthetic biology techniques
in manufacturing could account for more than one-third
of all global output—or nearly $30 trillion.49
Biotechnology can also strengthen domestic supply
chains, for example, through biologically engineered
crops that increase food security, a robust bioproduction
capacity to strengthen national security supply chains,
and a strong biopharmaceutical sector to ensure access
to breakthrough vaccines and treatments in the event
of new pandemics and biothreats.50 The biorevolution
could also enable more resilient supply chains that
promote broad-based economic growth. Today, man-
ufacturing processes often rely on imported chemical
inputs, exposing them to external supply chain shocks.
By contrast, biomanufacturing relies on organic biomass
ranging from agricultural byproducts such as animal
waste to forestry byproducts like bark and wood chips.
Unlike imported chemical inputs, these bio-inputs are
renewable, domestically sourced, and broadly distributed
across the country. As such, biomanufacturing facilities
could be colocated with farms, forests, and municipal
waste sites across the country, driving new jobs and
investments in more remote and rural communities.
Fourth, biotechnology could unlock powerful tools
to fight climate change and promote energy security.
Climate change threatens U.S. national security in
myriad ways, from direct harm to citizens from extreme
weather to increased geopolitical instability from
persistent drought and extreme heat.51 As Secretary
of Defense Lloyd Austin has said, “No nation can find
lasting security without addressing the climate crisis.”52
Fortunately, experts predict biotechnologies could
someday yield advanced biofuels to significantly reduce
emissions in transport, industry, and agriculture.53
Organic biomass—everything from fallen trees to food
waste to farm products—is an abundant, renewable
energy source. However, converting biomass to fuel still
requires an expensive process of breaking down the
cell walls into sugars and converting those sugars into
A recycling center converts food waste into biomass—a source of renewable energy. (Justin Paget via Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
@CNASDC
12
fuel. Biofuel proponents hope advances in synthetic
biology can streamline this process and make biofuels a
more compelling alternative. Biotechnology also holds
promise for carbon reduction and sequestration—from
carbon-absorbing microalgae to genetically modified
trees that pull more carbon dioxide from the air to genet-
ically modified crops that require less energy-intensive
fertilizers.54 As the urgency of tackling climate change
and achieving energy security grows, so does the case
for developing biotechnology-powered tools to advance
these goals.
Biotechnology can also transform industrial pro-
cesses to become less carbon intensive. For example,
BDO (1,4-Butanediol) is a widely used chemical for
manufacturing plastics and fibers. Companies such as
Genomatica are developing biobased alternatives to BDO
that use the fermentation of renewable feedstocks, such
as sugarcane, instead of conventional chemical inputs.
According to Boston Consulting Group, if the world’s 30
BDO manufacturers adopted bio-BDO, it would prevent
the production of more than 15 million tons of carbon
emissions annually—equivalent to the emissions of a
million Americans.55
Fifth, the United States has a strategic opportunity and
moral responsibility to set global norms and standards
for biotechnology consistent with democratic values.
The biorevolution raises difficult questions related to
privacy, ethics, safety, and responsible biotechnology
research, development, and deployment. The United
States and China have fundamentally divergent views
and practices surrounding the privacy of health data
and the ethics of biological engineering more broadly.
Infamously, Chinese scientist He Jiankui used CRISPR
to alter three human embryos, two of whom were born
in 2018 as Lulu and Nana, and a third who was born in
2019—the first genetically modified humans in history.56
Although China has since established stronger ethics
rules for human studies, they completely exempted the
private sector—a troubling omission.57
Just as troubling, the Chinese government has shown
few qualms about using biotechnology for population
control and repression of its ethnic and religious minori-
ties, such as the Uyghurs. In the Xinjiang region, Chinese
scientists are reportedly trying to use DNA samples to
create an image of a person’s face, with which it could
presumably use to track and target them.58 The govern-
ment also appears to have embraced a troubling vision
for offensive biotechnology capabilities.59 In December
2021, the U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) placed
several Chinese research institutes and biotechnology
firms on the entity list for helping the Chinese military
develop purported “brain control” weapons.60 In the past,
Chinese military leaders have openly speculated about
biotechnology’s potential offensive uses, for example, by
enabling “specific ethnic genetic attacks.”61 China’s trou-
bling biotechnology record makes it especially urgent
for the United States to proactively shape global biotech-
nology norms and standards.
Given the stakes, securing the United States’ position
as the 21st-century biopower warrants greater atten-
tion and action from policymakers to reinforce existing
advantages, shore up vulnerabilities, and seize opportu-
nities. To that end, chapter two of this report surveys the
current state of U.S. biotechnology leadership, focusing
on private sector strengths and weaknesses, along with
a deeper dive into federal government policies, invest-
ments, and initiatives. It identifies financial, policy,
regulatory, workforce, and other headwinds to U.S. bio-
technology leadership. In chapter three, this report looks
abroad to survey leading biotechnology allies, partners,
and competitors to identify their relative strengths
and weaknesses. Drawing on these assessments, the
authors outline immediate and longer-term recom-
mendations for leaders in policymaking and industry
in six key areas:
1. Invest in research and infrastructure
2. Expand biotalent
3. Unlock biodata
4. Strengthen and streamline policy
5. Lead globally
6. Build public trust

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
The State of American
 Biopower
Chapter 02
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
@CNASDC
14
T
his report will assess the state of American
biopower by examining specific tailwinds and
headwinds to U.S. leadership. The tailwinds
emanate from broader structural strengths of the U.S.
economy, as well as specific policy choices in the past
half century. The headwinds, by contrast, are largely the
result of inadequate policy and investment, as well as a
rising challenge from foreign competitors. This section
will briefly review key developments in U.S. biotech-
nology policy and survey the most important headwinds
and tailwinds to American biopower.
U.S. Biotechnology Policy
from Reagan to Biden

U.S. biotechnology policy remains a work in progress. To
date, the United States has no single major law providing
specific regulation for biotechnologies.62 Rather, federal
regulation falls primarily within the cross-cutting
jurisdictions of the FDA, the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), and the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), reflecting the technology’s diffuse,
general-purpose nature. Early on, federal regulation
emphasized a risk-based approach to ensure protection
for public safety, health, and the environment from
biotechnology products, while maintaining sufficient
flexibility to promote innovation and competitiveness. It
proved a difficult balance to strike, especially as the three
leading agencies independently developed their own
rules, procedures, and regulations.
Over time, the overlapping jurisdictions for biotech-
nology created regulatory confusion. In response, the
Reagan administration created a Coordinated Framework
for Regulation of Biotechnology in 1986 to clarify regula-
tory responsibilities across the federal government.63 The
first Bush administration shifted the framework to a more
“process agnostic” approach that focused more on a bio-
technology product’s application and context, rather than
assuming it was inherently riskier because it was derived
from biotechnologies.64
For more than two decades, federal biotechnology
regulations remained largely unchanged, even as the
sector notched major milestones—from Dolly, the first-
ever mammal cloned from an adult somatic cell in 1996,
to the development of the CRISPR platform in 2012.65 The
most important development of this period was passage
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996, or HIPAA.66 Although the law did not directly
regulate biotechnologies, it created strict rules on one of
its most important inputs: biodata. HIPAA established
limits on the collection, storage, use, transfer, and disclo-
sure of private health information (PHI), with the goal of
protecting patients’ medical privacy.67 Although HIPAA
allows access to PHI for research, it narrowly defines
research and establishes a multipart test to determine
data’s eligibility for use. Although most biotechnology
companies are not directly covered by HIPAA, the law
can indirectly shape their access to biodata by regulating
the covered health providers allowed to collect and share
it.68 HIPAA’s “minimum necessary standard,” for instance,
governs the extent to which researchers can use patients’
health and genomic data. The standard guards against
excessive data access to ensure patient privacy, but there
remains considerable ambiguity over how it applies to
genomic data, often impeding research.69

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
15
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Stepping back, the Trump
administration continued a shift
in federal policy from a more risk-
averse emphasis on consumer safety,
public health, and environmental
protection to a focus on innovation
and competitiveness.
Efforts to modernize and streamline biotechnology
regulations continued in the Obama administration.
The administration recognized that the overlapping
regulatory structure had created needless obstacles that
inhibited biotechnology innovation; for example, by
creating uncertainty over agency jurisdiction and review
timeframes.The complex regulatory structure proved
especially hard to navigate for small and mid-sized com-
panies and academic researchers. As a result, the White
House updated the Coordinated Framework in 2015
to clarify existing roles and responsibilities across the
three implementing agencies, among other provisions.70
Separately, the Obama administration also saw the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
open the Biological Technologies Office (BTO)—one
of the DoD’s first forays into harnessing biotechnology
for national security.71 The BTO focuses principally on
supporting breakthrough capabilities for operational bio-
technology, such as biosensors and biobased materials,
and boosting warfighter readiness through improved
tactical care and medical countermeasures.
During the Trump administration, U.S. leadership
in critical and emerging technologies assumed a more
central role in the broader U.S.-China competition. As
with other emerging technologies, such as AI, the admin-
istration embraced a light-touch regulatory approach for
biotechnology that emphasized innovation and private
sector leadership. The June 2019 Executive Order on
Modernizing the Regulatory Framework for Agricultural
Biotechnology Products epitomized this approach.72 It
prioritized innovation and economic growth and again
directed the three coordinating agencies to streamline
biotechnology regulations.73 It also called for a unified
online portal of federal biotechnology regulations, which
the USDA now hosts.74
The Trump administration also laid the groundwork
for one of the most significant biotechnology efforts
to date: the Bioindustrial Manufacturing and Design
Ecosystem (BioMADE), which launched in April 2021.75
With an initial $87 million investment from the DoD,
BioMADE was created as an independent, nonprofit
body with a mission to foster a “sustainable, domestic
end-to-end bioindustrial manufacturing ecosys-
tem.”76 It emphasizes collaboration between industry,
academia, and government and supports initiatives to
bridge the gap between “lab-scale research and at-scale
manufacturing,” accelerate technology deployment or
redevelopment, derisk key infrastructure, and promote
education and workforce development.77
Stepping back, the Trump administration con-
tinued a shift in federal policy from a more risk-averse
emphasis on consumer safety, public health, and envi-
ronmental protection to a focus on innovation and
competitiveness. The Biden administration doubled
down on this shift, but went much further to marshal
federal tools, resources, and policy to catalyze U.S.
biotechnology leadership. It also restored robust federal
funding for R&D at the National Science Foundation
(NSF), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the
Department of Energy (DOE)—the historic foundation
of biotechnology breakthroughs.
An early initiative was the June 2021 launch of the
DOE’s Energy Earthshots Initiative, which seeks to
catalyze clean energy breakthroughs within the decade.78
Several Earthshots call for breakthroughs in biotech-
nologies. The Industrial Heatshot, for example, seeks
to reduce heavy industry emissions by 85 percent by
2035 through supporting solutions such as “biobased
manufacturing, electrolysis, ultraviolet curing,
and advanced separations.”79
The capstone of the Biden administration’s efforts
was the September 2022 Executive Order on Advancing
Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Innovation
for a Sustainable, Safe, and Secure Bioeconomy
(Biotechnology Executive Order).80 The Biotechnology
Executive Order (EO) is the United States’ most ambi-
tious and comprehensive vision for biotechnology
leadership to date, with a clear emphasis on promoting
and protecting the nascent sector and unlocking biotech-
nology’s benefits across the economy. The EO sought to
galvanize agencies and offices across the federal gov-
ernment to place renewed emphasis on promoting and
securing U.S. biotechnology leadership through a range
of investments, actions, studies, and policy changes.81

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
@CNASDC
16
The executive order’s stated goals were principally to:
 ¡ bolster and coordinate federal investment in
biotechnology R&D;
 ¡ cultivate a biological data ecosystem to promote
innovation;
 ¡ improve and expand domestic biomanufacturing
production capacity;
 ¡ boost domestic biomass production;
 ¡ expand market opportunities for bioenergies and
biobased products;
 ¡ train and support a diverse and skilled
biotechnology workforce;
 ¡ clarify and streamline regulations; and
 ¡ strengthen international cooperation around
biotechnology R&D.

One of the EO’s deliverables was a report on the state
of biotechnology regulation under the Coordinated
Framework.82 Underscoring the overlapping and often
burdensome regulatory structure for biotechnology,
the report found that 13 different federal offices had
jurisdiction over some element of the biotechnology
sector, with six at the USDA, five at the FDA, and two
at the EPA.83
Arguably, the Biotechnology EO’s most important
step was mobilizing more than $2 billion for various
initiatives:84
 ¡ $1.5 billion for the DoD to jumpstart a domestic
industrial base for biomanufacturing
 ¡ $500 million from the USDA to support
American innovative fertilizer production with
five-year grants of up to $100 million
 ¡ $358 million from the DOE for biotechnology-
related R&D for bioproducts and biomaterials
 ¡ $200 million from the U.S. Economic
Development Administration to create “tech
hubs” to advance the bioeconomy
Federal Offices with Biotechnology Jurisdiction
FDA
USDA EPA
CENTER FOR BIOLOGICS
EVALUATION AND
RESEARCH
CENTER FOR DRUG
EVALUATION AND
RESEARCH
CENTER FOR DEVICES
AND RADIOLOGICAL
HEALTH
CENTER FOR FOOD
SAFETY AND APPLIED
NUTRITION
CENTER FOR VETERINARY
MEDICINE
VETERINARY
SERVICES
OFFICE OF FIELD
OPERATIONS
OFFICE OF POLICY
AND PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT
OFFICE OF PUBLIC
HEALTH SERVICES
BIOTECHNOLOGY
REGULATORY
SERVICES
OFFICE OF
PESTICIDE
PROGRAMS
OCSPP
OFFICE OF
POLLUTION
PREVENTION
AND TOXICS
Agricultural Marketing
Services
Oﬃce of Chemical
Safety and Pollution
Prevention
Food Safety and Inspection Services
FOOD DISCLOSURE
AND LABELING
DIVISION
AMS
FSISAPHIS
Animal and Plant Health Inspection

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
17
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Although the Biotechnology EO was well received
among biotechnology advocates in government and
industry, implementation has been slow and uneven. The
Federation of American Scientists developed a tracker of
all the deliverables required by the 2022 Biotechnology
EO, and, as of November 2024, more than half had a
status of “unknown,” even though many were past their
required deadline.85
A major outcome of the 2022 Biotechnology EO
was the March 2023 release of the Bold Goals for U .S.
Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing.86 Under the Bold
Goals, five federal agencies identified priorities for an
ambitious 20-year biotechnology research agenda:87
1. Climate (DOE): Demonstrate and deploy biobased
alternatives that could replace more than 90 percent
of existing plastics and other commercial polymers.
2. Food and Agriculture (USDA): Reduce agricultural
methane emissions to help reduce U.S. greenhouse
gas emissions by 50 percent.
3. Supply Chain (DOC): Meet at least 30 percent of
domestic demand for chemicals through competi-
tive, sustainable biomanufacturing means.
4. Health (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services): Increase manufacturing of cell-based
therapies, thereby expanding access, reducing health
disparities, and decreasing the manufacturing cost
10-fold within 20 years.
5. Cross-Cutting Advances (NSF): Sequence the
genomes of one million microbial species and clarify
the function of at least 80 percent of these newly
discovered genes within five years.

The Bold Goals offer a high-level vision to galvanize
public, private, and academic investment and collabora-
tion to realize biotechnology’s potential for addressing
urgent national priorities. In that sense, it was also part of
both the Trump and Biden administrations’ efforts to shift
the public conversation—and federal bureaucracy—toward
positive applications of biotechnology. However, the Bold
Goals do not include any new funding or commitments to
prioritize existing funds or efforts for biotechnology R&D.
They simply point out the need to do so.
The Biotechnology EO also accelerated DoD efforts
to boost the bioeconomy through two major new initia-
tives. First, it directed the DoD to create a Tri-Service
Biotechnology for a Resilient Supply Chain (T-BRSC)
program to provide more than $270 million over five
years to accelerate the R&D of defense-relevant supply
chains, including “fuels, fire-resistant composites,
polymers and resins, and protective materials.”88 Second,
it provided $1 billion over five years for a new Distributed
Bioindustrial Manufacturing Investment Program
(DBMIP), which will expand domestic biomanufacturing
capacity for products with both defense and commer-
cial applications.89 Unlike the conventional defense
industrial base, there is no robust U.S. biomanufacturing
industrial base today. The DoD’s efforts through T-BRSC,
DBMIP , and its investments in BioMADE all seek to
build this biomanufacturing industrial base from the
ground up. Although there is significant overlap in the
three initiatives’ broader goals, at a high-level, T-BRSC
seeks to boost biotechnology R&D for defense-specific
products and supply chains, whereas DBMIP can also
support products with broader commercial applications,
such as critical chemicals. BioMADE, by contrast, aims
to foster America’s bioindustrial manufacturing base
more broadly and focuses more on promoting cross-sec-
toral collaboration. In March 2023, the DoD increased
BioMADE’s budget to $450 million.90
Since the Biotechnology EO, civilian agencies have
launched many initiatives to boost American biopower.
NSF created the BioFoundries Program to help build the
 Department of Defense (Biomanufacturing industrial base)
 U.S. Department of Agriculture (Fertilizer production grants)
 Department of Energy (Biotechnology R&D)
 Economic Development Administration (Tech hubs for the bioeconomy)
2022 Biotechnology Executive Order
Funding to Advance the Bioeconomy
59%20%
14%
8%
Source: Bold Goals for U.S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing: Harnessing Research
and Development to Further Societal Goals, The White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy, March 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2023/03/Bold-Goals-for-U.S.-Biotechnology-and-Biomanufacturing-
Harnessing-Research-and-Development-To-Further-Societal-Goals-FINAL.pdf .

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
@CNASDC
18
national infrastructure to drive U.S. biotechnology and
the bioeconomy.91 NSF envisions these biofoundries as
integrated facilities that combine biological disciplines
with automation, AI, and advanced computing to drive
biotechnology innovation, and it will award up to $24
million per project to support biofoundries nation-
wide.92 In January 2024, NSF also designated one of its
first “regional innovation engines” in North Carolina
to drive breakthroughs in regenerative medicine
and could invest up to $160 million in the project
over 10 years.93
In October 2023, the administration also designated
11 tech hubs for biotechnology (out of a total of 31),
supporting activity across 13 states and Puerto Rico.94
Congress created the tech hubs initiative through the
2022 CHIPS and Science Act to encourage collabo-
ration among industry, academia, and state and local
governments to spur job creation, investment, and
competitiveness in key technologies.95
Notably, Congress also authorized the creation
of a National Security Commission on Emerging
Biotechnology (NSCEB) in the FY22 National Defense
Authorization Act.96 Inspired by the success of the
National Security Commission on AI, Congress charged
the NSCEB with reviewing how advancements in
biotechnology will shape existing and future defense
activities and U.S. national security more broadly. In
January 2024, the commission released its Interim
Report, which emphasized the potential of biotech-
nology to deliver breakthrough solutions in several
previously discussed areas, from climate change
to defense, while also underscoring the urgency of
securing U.S. biotechnology leadership as competitors
seek to close the gap.97 The NSCEB plans to submit
its final report in early 2025 and will operate through
summer 2026 to engage policymakers and the public
about its recommendations.98
A Texas petrochemical plant releases emissions. The Department of Energy's Industrial Heatshot seeks to reduce heavy emissions by 85
percent by 2035 through unlocking the potential of biotechnologies. (Bloomberg Creative via Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
19
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
American Biopower: Tailwinds
No country boasts a stronger biotechnology sector than
the United States, which has blazed the trail for the past
half century. Like many other critical and emerging
technologies, biotechnology benefits from America’s
powerful tailwinds. These include:
1. World-class research institutions
2. Top global talent
3. Agile capital markets
4. Attractive intellectual property protections
5. Risk-tolerant innovation culture
6. Robust public and private funding for general
and applied research
Academic & Research Institutions
World-leading academic institutions are a pillar of
American biopower. According to the U.S. News &
World Report, 6 of the top 10 best global universities
for biotechnology and applied microbiology are in
the United States, including Harvard University, the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford
University, the University of California at San Diego,
Johns Hopkins University, and the University of
Pennsylvania. Three are in China.99 Biotechnology
also benefits from significant upstream investments in
biosciences by U.S. academic institutions. In 2020, U.S.
academic R&D for bioscience was more than $51 billion,
up 28 percent since 2015.100 Since 2019, however, annual
growth for academic R&D bioscience spending has been
just 2.8 percent—essentially flat in real terms.101
According to the Australian Strategic Policy Institute
(ASPI), the United States leads in three of seven key
biotechnologies: vaccines and medical countermeasures,
genetic engineering, and nuclear medicine and radio-
therapy.102 China leads in the remaining four: synthetic
biology, biological manufacturing, genomes and genetic
sequencing and analysis, and novel antibiotics and
antivirals.103 The United States dominates high-impact
research for vaccines and medical countermeasures.104
This leadership was on full display during the pandemic,
when the U.S.-based Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna
vaccines proved roughly 95 percent effective in reducing
severe cases, compared to just 51 percent effective for
China’s CoronaVac vaccine, according to clinical data.105
Patents, Publications, and Prizes
The United States continues to lead in high-quality
research and patents related to biotechnology. Since
2012, the United States has generated far more highly
cited biological publications—roughly 600 per year—
than competitor nations, although China is quickly
closing the gap, doubling its highly cited publications
from roughly 200 in 2018 to 400 in 2021.106 Between 1999
and 2013, U.S. patents also comprised up to 45 percent
of all leading patents filed in biotechnology, medical
technology, and pharmaceuticals.107
The United States also leads in prestigious prizes in
key fields for biotechnology. Since 1985, nearly half of
Japan’s International Prize for Biology awards have
gone to American scientists. The United States likewise
boasts the most Nobel Prize winners for chemistry,
accounting for 76 out of 194 Nobel laureates from 1901 to
2023 for advancements in everything from developing
new methods of gene editing to conducting the directed
evolution of enzymes.108
Public Investment
Robust and relatively stable federal funding has been
essential to U.S. biotechnology R&D. Federal funding
has principally supported basic R&D in biological
sciences, with applied biotechnology R&D falling largely
to the private sector.109 Several federal agencies have
funded biotechnology R&D and other initiatives and
investments have predominantly flowed from NIH and
NSF.110 As such, public investment has overwhelmingly
supported biotechnology R&D related to medicine and
health, dwarfing support for other promising fields such
as energy and agriculture.
NIH is the world’s largest public funder of biomedical
research, investing most of its annual appropriations—
nearly $48 billion for FY23—in health and life sciences
research, including for breakthrough medical treat-
ments.111 NIH funding has driven biotechnology progress
via two pathways: first, through direct investment in
biotechnology techniques such as DNA sequencing
and protein engineering; and second, through broader
investment in foundational research areas such as
biophysics, virology, pharmacology, and molecular
and cellular biology.112
World-leading academic institutions
are a pillar of American biopower.
World-leading academic institutions
are a pillar of American biopower.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
@CNASDC
20
Over the years, these investments have had consid-
erable spillover benefits for biotechnology. Arguably,
the most seminal breakthrough came in the early
1960s, when NIH-funded researchers cracked the
genetic code—transforming the foundational under-
standing of biology and opening the door to new
research and innovation across a range of scientific
disciplines.113 Following the 1961 discovery of mRNA,
more than 50 years of NIH-funded research into
viruses and vaccine delivery cleared the way for the
development of the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna
mRNA COVID-19 vaccines within the first 100
days of the pandemic, saving millions of lives and
trillions of dollars.114
NSF has also driven U.S. biotechnology leadership
through decades-long investments in fundamental
research at the intersection of biology and engi-
neering, computing, and other physical sciences;
application-driven research to develop biobased
materials, machines, and manufacturing technologies;
education and workforce development; and partnerships
with the private and nonprofit sectors to promote com-
mercialization.115 NSF’s interdisciplinary investments are
well suited to biotechnology, which sits at the crossroads
of biology and several other fields from engineering to
mathematics to computer science. NSF invests roughly
$250 million annually to support U.S. biotechnology
and the bioeconomy, and it was the first federal agency
to invest in a synthetic biology research center.116 Today,
NSF has more than 10 directorates and offices sup-
porting biotechnology R&D.117
A scientist loads a DNA gel to better analyze DNA fragments, demonstrating an important technique in molecular biology and genetic
research. The National Science Foundation plays a vital role in funding general and applied biotechnology research, which is foundational to
broader biotechnology innovation and the bioeconomy. (Assembly via Getty Images)
The USDA has also been central to
driving U.S. biotechnology leadership,
with a focus on research and
applications related to forestry, farming,
and growing the domestic market for
biobased products.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
21
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
The USDA has also been central to driving U.S. bio-
technology leadership, with a focus on research and
applications related to forestry, farming, and growing
the domestic market for biobased products. Often with
support from the USDA, U.S. farmers have eagerly
adopted genetically engineered crop varieties: in 2012,
around 90 percent of all corn, cotton, and soybeans
planted in the United States were produced through
genetic engineering.118 The United States is the world’s
largest exporter of agricultural products, and biotech-
nology has expanded its trade balances in agriculture
and helped feed the world. The USDA has also grown
the domestic market for biobased products through
its BioPreferred program, which boosts the purchases
of biobased products—those derived from renewable
organic materials such as plants and other agricultural,
marine, and forestry materials—by requiring that federal
agencies and contractors give purchasing preference to
biobased products.119
Although NIH, NSF, and the USDA have been the
primary drivers of federal biotechnology investment, other
agencies have played a role through smaller investments or
policy developments, including the FDA, EPA, DoD, DOE,
and DOC.
Over the past quarter century, the White House and
Congress have also worked together to drive signature ini-
tiatives that helped catalyze biotechnology breakthroughs.
Most prominent was the Human Genome Project,
which began in 1990 with a $2.7 billion investment from
Congress.120 A later study found that for every $1 invested
in the project, it returned $141 to the U.S. economy.121
Another initiative was the President’s Emergency Plan
for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), which has invested more than
$100 billion since 2003 to strengthen the global response
to HIV/AIDS.122 The historic investment not only saved
more than 25 million lives but also helped lay a biotech-
nology foundation of laboratories, testing sites, expertise,
and research breakthroughs that helped enable the rapid
U.S. response to COVID-19 under Operation Warp Speed
(OWS).123 Launched under the Trump administration,
OWS invested $18 billion to accelerate private sector
development and deployment of COVID-19 vaccines
in less than a year.124 Beyond preventing 18.5 million
hospitalizations and up to 3.2 million additional deaths,
OWS also significantly increased research in mRNA
technologies and demonstrated the power of ambitious
public-private partnerships to streamline regulation and
jumpstart innovation.125
The Human Genome Project, PEPFAR, and OWS all
underscore the potential of well-resourced, ambitious
public investments to deliver life-changing biotechnology
breakthroughs. However, all three initiatives focused on
the health and medical sectors, again underscoring the
historic underinvestment in the broader bioeconomy.
Private Investment
Significant private investment—overwhelmingly in the
biomedical and biopharmaceutical sectors—remains
an enduring asset for American biopower. During the
COVID-19 pandemic, private investment peaked as the
lifesaving vaccines demonstrated the sector’s potential.
In 2021, there were a record 114 biotechnology initial
public offerings (IPOs) totaling $16.1 billion in value,
compared to just 47 IPOs totaling $5.6 billion in 2019.126
However, private biotechnology investment has since
dropped precipitously. In 2023, there were just 11
biotechnology IPOs, totaling $2.52 billion, on track to
fall short of even prepandemic levels.127 As of the third
quarter of 2024, the S&P Biotechnology Select Industry
Index was down more than 40 percent compared to its
peak in February 2021.128
As public investments through short-term initiatives
such as OWS ramped down, venture capital (VC) funding
has helped sustain biotech innovation. In 2023, VCs
invested nearly $30 billion for biotechnology firms, down
from a height of $54.4 billion in 2021, but still more than
double the prepandemic total of $12 billion in 2019.129
Focusing on the total volume or value of IPOs or VC
funding, however, can obscure where the investment
has flowed, and how that may shape the future of the
U.S. biotechnology sector. In general, biotechnology
firms have relatively high R&D intensity, longer product
development cycles, and lower prospects of commer-
cial success compared to, for instance, many narrow AI
applications.130 Compounding the challenge, uncertainty
over additional federal funding and higher interest rates
has made private capital more risk averse, pushing it
toward more established areas and biotechnology firms
and applications, primarily in medicine and biophar-
maceuticals.131 This does not bode well for earlier-stage
biotechnology start-ups in other fields, such as defense,
energy, agriculture, and manufacturing.
In 2022, more than $15 billion in VC funding flowed to
platform biotechnologies—general biotechnology tools,
such as CRISPR—with the rest flowing mostly to asset-
based biotechnologies—narrower products or treatments
U.S. biotechnology firms continue to
win the race for global investment.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
@CNASDC
22
for specific purposes, such as insulin treatment for
diabetes.132 VC funding for platform biotechnologies went
largely to regenerative medicines, integrating large omics
datasets, and new gene therapies, such as improved mRNA
technology.133 However, there is growing private sector
interest—especially from large pharmaceutical companies
and VC firms—in integrating AI and machine learning
techniques into biotechnology. The biggest recipient of
VC investments in platform biotechnologies between 2019
and 2022 was machine learning–enabled drug discovery,
receiving more than $9 billion.134
Stepping back, U.S. biotechnology firms continue to win
the race for global investment. In the first three quarters
of 2023, 9 of the top 10 global funding rounds went to U.S.
biotechnology companies. Only one of the companies was
based in China (GenScript ProBio).135 Again, private invest-
ment and activity in biotechnology continues to focus
predominantly on the health, medical, and pharmaceutical
sectors, at the expense of promising applications in areas
like energy, manufacturing, and defense.
Another American strength is the relatively supportive
environment for biotechnology start-ups. As of December
2022, the United States was home to 9 of the top 10
biotechnology accelerators worldwide.136 As of 2021, the
United States also had 2,840 active biotechnology com-
panies—more than any other Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) country—followed
closely by the United Kingdom (UK) with 2,770 biotech-
nology firms (as of 2023).137 OECD data shows that the U.S.
biotechnology sector also scores well on “R&D intensity,” a
measure of the sector’s total R&D expenses as a share of its
value added to the economy.138 This allows for a rough com-
parison of how innovation oriented biotechnology sectors
are across countries. By this measure, the United States
lagged only Belgium, Switzerland, and Lithuania.139
Bioscience Industry
The United States boasts a large and dynamic bioscience
sector.140 In 2021, the industry’s total direct economic
impact was $1.2 trillion, for a total $2.9 trillion in
indirect impact.141 According to a 2022 report from the
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO), the
domestic bioscience industry employed 2.1 million
people across more than 127 ,000 businesses, with
employment growth outpacing the broader economy.142
Between 2002 and 2022, the number of life sciences
researchers in the United States increased by 87
percent, compared to a 14 percent increase in jobs
across the economy over the same period.143 As of 2021,
U.S. bioscience workers earned roughly $126,000 a
year, 85 percent more than their average private sector
counterparts.144 Notably, the bioscience industry is also
broadly distributed across the nation, with over half of
all U.S. metropolitan areas boasting a concentration of
employment in at least one bioscience industry subsector
or market. Nineteen U.S. metro areas specialize in at least
three of the five key industry subsectors.145
Summary
The combination of world-leading research institutions,
strong public and private investment, and a thriving
domestic bioscience sector have ensured U.S. leadership
in key subfields of biotechnology research—but the U.S.
position is far from secure. These tailwinds may have
propelled American biopower, but they require constant
tending to endure.
American Biopower: Headwinds

The creation of the NSCEB reflects a recognition that
biotechnology is essential to 21st-century national com-
petitiveness and security, but also that existing policy is
inadequate to secure U.S. leadership. Although powerful
tailwinds have propelled the U.S. biotechnology leader-
ship thus far, securing America’s position as the global
biopower will also require navigating domestic head-
winds, specifically:
1. Inconsistent federal definitions, standards, and
regulations
2. Insufficient public and private investment,
especially for biotechnology applications beyond
health and medicine
3. Inadequate biotalent
4. Insufficient and often inaccessible biodata due to
regulatory ambiguities, underdeveloped infra-
structure, and lack of a coordinated effort to
maximize existing and future U.S. biodata
5. Lack of broad and durable public trust for sensi-
tive next-generation biotechnology applications
such as genomic editing and human-computer
interfaces

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
23
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Definitions, Standards, and Regulations
The federal government lacks a consensus definition
for biotechnology and the bioeconomy, which means
Washington will struggle to track and improve what it
cannot uniformly measure. Providing this consistent
measure, however, is especially hard for the bioeconomy
given the growing number of sectors it includes, from
pharmaceuticals to energy, agriculture, textiles, and
defense. Nevertheless, developing a single working
definition of biotechnology and the bioeconomy is
essential to better measuring progress and mobilizing
investment. Today, different federal agencies maintain
definitions of biotechnology relevant to their jurisdiction
in areas such as agriculture, defense, and health.146
None of the definitions capture the full spectrum
of biotechnology techniques and applications.
Compounding the challenge, key partners, allies, and
international bodies have their own definitions of
biotechnology, impeding global efforts to measure,
track, and partner in the sector. Domestically, the lack
of uniform definitions and terms confuses policy and
undermines investment. Some investors reportedly view
Europe’s bioindustry as more appealing because the
European Union (EU) has adopted uniform standards,
unlike the United States.147
The Biden administration recognized this challenge
and advanced two solutions.148 The first is to modify the
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)
and the North American Product Classification System
(NAPCS). These two systems generate federal codes to
measure and track economic activity across different
sectors and products. This provides a clear, uniform
measure for government and third-party researchers to
identify subtrends across the economy. However, this
existing framework focuses on specific sectors and final
products, whereas the bioeconomy cuts across multiple
sectors and hinges more on the techniques used to create
a product, rather than the product itself. In addition, a
single company could use biotechnologies to generate
multiple products across different sectors. The second
option is for the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) to create a satellite account, which provides
more in-depth analysis of parts of the economy, such as
outdoor recreation or tourism, that can be obscured by
the BEA’s high-level statistics.149 However, a March 2023
report from the BEA concluded that, while developing
a satellite account for the bioeconomy was technically
feasible, refining it to capture specific parts of the bio-
economy was not due to insufficient data and a lack of
consensus definitions.150
In the Biotechnology EO, the Biden administra-
tion advanced its own definition of the bioeconomy as
“economic activity derived from biotechnology and
biomanufacturing.”151 It also tasked the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) with developing the
Bioeconomy Lexicon, which itself advanced a broader
definition of the bioeconomy as “economic activity
derived from the life sciences, particularly in the areas
of biotechnology and biomanufacturing, including
industries, products, services, and the workforce.”152
The lexicon seeks to harmonize terms to help measure
and grow the bioeconomy, and NIST acknowledges that
its definitions are subject to change given the rapidly
evolving nature of the field. Although the administration
rightly prioritized developing consensus definitions—
and it has made progress through the BEA report and
NIST lexicon—that consensus has yet to form.
The lack of consensus definitions and standards
reflects a broader lack of a coherent, streamlined reg-
ulatory framework for biotechnology. Overlapping,
burdensome, and often ambiguous federal regulations—
primarily from the EPA, USDA, and U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services (HHS)—continue to
overload small and medium biotechnology enterprises
with inconsistent definitions, standards, and approval
timelines, despite repeated efforts across several admin-
istrations to make progress through the Coordinated
Framework. Moreover, existing biotechnology regula-
tions do not always apply to all biotechnology research,
complicating efforts for the government to support
and coordinate federal biotechnology research, while
burdening researchers and innovators with a complex
compliance regime.
Public Investment
Although federal investment in biotechnology R&D has
been invaluable, it remains inadequate and imbalanced.
Specifically, the United States must scale public and
private investment in biotechnology ventures beyond
health and medicine, as important as they are. The
DoD’s investments in BioMADE and DBMIP are vital
but insufficient to build a truly world-class domestic
bioindustrial base for the country’s defense and
commercial needs.
The leading U.S. government funders of biotechnology
R&D are NSF and NIH. Despite considerable strengths,
as structured, NSF and NIH face restrictions on the types
of projects and applicants they can fund. NSF funds
mostly fundamental research and education, and it tends
to spread funding across its 10 biotechnology-relevant

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
@CNASDC
24
sentiment and higher interest rates also created more
cautious capital, leading investors to opt for more estab-
lished companies and applications.
In 2023, total VC and private equity investment in
biotechnology was $18.1 billion—32 percent less than the
$25.3 billion invested in 2022, and far short of the $48.25
billion invested in 2021 and $29.6 billion in 2020.158 But
the tide appears to be turning. In January 2024, biotech-
nology companies raised more than $6 billion—the most
since the pandemic-era boom—likely due to improved
investor sentiment, a general market rebound, increased
M&A activity across the sector, and expectations of lower
interest rates.159 As of November 2024, the closely watched
SPDR Biotech exchange-traded fund (ETF), which shed
almost two-thirds of its value since 2021, has recovered by
more than 50 percent from its October 2023 low.160
Even as private investment recovers, investors remain
sensitive to inherent risks in the biotechnology sector,
which include long development timelines, uncertain
outcomes of clinical trials and commercial viability, and
considerable regulation. Compounding investor reluc-
tance are higher interest rates and a perceived boom and
bust cycle for biotechnology companies such as Moderna,
which saw demand for its products spike during the
pandemic only to crater in its wake. This has especially
limited available capital for early-stage biotechnology
ventures, which rely on equity financing for initial, pre-
market R&D. Early-stage biotechnology firms now face
increased competition for initial capital, which could
limit their R&D and increase pressure to demonstrate
product viability earlier in development. In short, inves-
tors continue to see significant potential returns from
biotechnologies but are hedging toward more proven
firms and applications.
Rebounding private investment, IPOs, and M&A
activity, however, have not changed the market’s over-
whelming preference for biotechnology applications in
medicine, health, and pharmaceuticals. Between 2018
and 2021, less than 1 percent of all VC funding went to
biofuels and agricultural chemicals, with virtually all
the remaining capital going to biotechnologies related
to medicine, health, and drug discovery and develop-
ment.161 Maturing a broader U.S. bioeconomy will require
public and private investment beyond traditional areas of
focus in medicine, health, and pharmaceuticals. Trends
in biotechnology patents mirror this dynamic. Of all the
directorates that manage a host of programs, which
can dilute impact. America’s Seed Fund—an NSF ini-
tiative that provides $200 million annually to support
technology prototyping and commercialization—shows
promise, but supports a range of ventures, again diluting
its benefit to the bioeconomy. For its part, NIH focuses
on health and biomedical-related research. Although
NSF and NIH provide vital support for early-stage
research; STEM workforce development; and cross-sec-
toral collaboration, these restrictions limit their ability to
catalyze the broader biotechnology sector.
Private Investment
Private investment—VC funding in particular—plays
an indispensable role in seeding and scaling the U.S.
biotechnology sector. However, the reliance on private
funding exposes the sector to volatile market conditions
and investor sentiment. The U.S. biotechnology sector
experienced this firsthand following the pandemic. After
peaking in 2021, private funding, IPOs, and mergers and
acquisitions (M&A) activity for biotechnology collapsed,
leading to layoffs, product delays, and even closures.153
In 2022, the biotech IPO market collapsed 93 percent
from the prior year, and around 30 percent of public
biotech companies in the United States and the EU had
less than a year’s worth of cash on hand.154 More than half
of the smaller, publicly traded biotech companies have
insufficient cash to make it through 2025.155
Compared to 2020 and 2021, there was a 54 percent
decline in capital available to the biotech sector in
2022.156 Many firms are still reeling from high-profile
bank failures, notably the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank.
The collapse in IPOs, declining access to capital, and
greater risk aversion from investors has especially hurt
smaller biotech companies. According to analysis from
Ernst & Young, out of 223 companies that went public
in 2020 and 2021 that remained publicly traded at the
end of 2022, more than 90 percent saw lower market
values compared to their IPOs, with an average decline
in market value of more than 50 percent. The cash-con-
strained environment has led smaller firms to reduce
spending, undercutting R&D.157 Changing investor
Even as private investment recovers,
investors remain sensitive to inherent
risks in the biotechnology sector.
The United States must scale
public and private investment in
biotechnology ventures beyond
health and medicine.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
25
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
patents in bioscience between 2018 and 2021, patents in
agricultural chemicals comprised just 1.6 percent, plants
4.2 percent, and biopolymers 0.1 percent, compared
to 66.1 percent for medical and surgical devices
and pharmaceuticals.162
The overwhelming focus of public and private funding
on health and pharmaceutical applications of biotech-
nology has also developed a strong disposition among life
scientists to view biotechnology through these lenses,
which can limit demand signals for commercial and
general research in applications in other areas such as
energy, agriculture, material design, and manufacturing.
Broadening interest from investors, scientists, talent, and
policymakers in the broader biotechnology ecosystem is
essential to securing U.S. leadership in a field far broader
than health, medicine, and pharmaceuticals.
Biotalent
As with many other critical and emerging technologies,
insufficient talent is an increasing headwind for
American biopower. The wide range of skills and
occupations within biotechnology reflects the sector’s
breadth, as well as its rapid evolution and growth. Key
sectors within the bioeconomy include the biomedical,
bioindustrial, and agricultural sectors, each with their
own permutation of occupations, skills, and training. The
lack of a consensus definition for biotechnology, however,
makes it difficult to measure the sector’s total and
projected employment, or employment demand.
To be clear, U.S. biotechnology leadership does not
require producing more biotechnologists per se, but rather
combinations of biochemists, biophysicists, biological
technicians, material scientists, laboratory technicians,
chemical engineers, computer scientists, and technicians
working together on specific products and applications.
Efforts to improve STEM talent broadly will, by
extension, alleviate skill shortages within biotechnology.
According to the President’s Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology (PCAST), the United States
must increase the total number of undergraduates
receiving STEM degrees by 34 percent every year to
retain the country’s edge in science and technology. 163 At
the same time, 90 percent of technology industry leaders
say recruiting is a “major or moderate challenge.”164
The domestic STEM workforce has always relied in
part on robust and stable federal funding for general
R&D. Domestic biotalent has depended specifically
on general R&D in fields such as biological science,
engineering, and information and computer sciences.
Concerningly, a 2020 report from the NASEM found
that “insufficient federal funding for U.S. universities
and bioeconomy training programs has the potential to
diminish the ability to produce and retain a skilled tech-
nical workforce.”165 Two years later, the PCAST assessed
that an insufficient workforce was inhibiting U.S.
Careers in the Future Bioeconomy Workforce
Source: “Building the Bioworkforce of the Future,” The White House, June 2023,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Building-the-Bioworkforce-of-the-Future.pdf .
Biomedical Agricultural Bioindustrial
Scientist
Biomedical engineer
Biomedical technician
Process engineer
Microbiologist
Medical manufacturing technician
Fermentation engineer
Plant and animal scientist and geneticist
Food scientist
Soil and plant scientist
Field technician
Laboratory assistant
Fermentation engineer
Biochemist
Biofuels technology and product
development manager
Fermentation engineer
Research engineer
Operations manager
Cross-Cutting
Computer systems analyst
Software developer
Data scientist
Machine learning engineer
Patent lawyer
Bioethicist
Computational genomics researcher

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
@CNASDC
26
@CNASDC
biomanufacturing capacity, limiting the ability to “meet
the demand to scale up new bioproducts and the bioman-
ufacturing infrastructure necessary to move products to
pilot scale production. This has led some entrepreneurs
and companies to move to Europe or Asia to begin scaling
up production.”166
There are also challenges at the postgraduate level.
The NSF has tracked U.S. recipients of doctoral degrees
since 1992. The following breakdown of biotechnolo-
gy-related fields suggests that, while doctorates in key
areas such as life sciences and biological and biomedical
sciences have increased substantially, other important
fields such as chemistry, agricultural sciences and natural
resources, materials science engineering, and industrial
and manufacturing engineering have seen only modest
increases. Those fields remain, in total volume, signifi-
cantly smaller.
Data from the OECD, which has a slightly different
method for organizing doctorate or equivalent degrees,
suggests that U.S. graduates in biotechnology-related fields
have remained largely stagnant since 2013.
The challenges to growing America’s biotalent coincide
with several reports confirming rapid growth in the U.S.
biotechnology sector and increasing demand for biotech-
nology-relevant skills. Data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics indicate that many biotechnology-linked occupa-
tions are projected to grow “faster” to “much faster” than
other jobs in the U.S. economy more broadly.167
Although doctorate recipients will continue to play a
central role in driving biotechnology research and inno-
vation, the bioeconomy has the potential to significantly
expand employment in several occupations that require
less than a four-year degree, let alone a PhD, including
food science technicians, biological technicians, and
manufacturing product technicians. Indeed, some bio-
technology employers have reportedly hired community
college students before they even graduate.168
Growing private sector demand for biotechnology
professionals, however, could undermine the training
and innovation pipeline by luring graduates away from
postgraduate academic opportunities by offering much
higher salaries. Between 2021 and 2022, there was a 10
percent drop in the number of U.S. citizens and permanent
residents pursuing postdocs in biological and biomed-
ical sciences.169 Similarly, survey data from NSF indicates
that fewer U.S. doctoral recipients than ever before are
pursuing postdocs in the life sciences.170 Robust federal
funding for general R&D in life sciences can mitigate the
hemorrhaging of PhDs to industry and ensure that today’s
private biotechnology demands do not inadvertently stifle
tomorrow’s biotechnology workforce.
Uneven Growth in U.S. Doctorate Recipients in
Key Biotechnology Fields
Biological and
biomedical
sciences
Health sciences
Chemistry
Computer and
information
sciences
Agricultural
sciences
and natural
resources
Bioengineering
and biomedical
engineering
Chemical
engineering
Materials
science
engineering
Industrial and
manufacturing
engineering
 1.000 2.000 3.000 4.000 5.000 6.000 7.000 8.000 9.000 10.000
0
@CNASDC
 1992 2012
 1997 2017
 2002 2022
 2007
Source: “Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Universities: 2022,” U.S. National Science
Foundation, September 28, 2023, https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf24300 .

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
27
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
A closer look at doctoral recipients in biotechnol-
ogy-related fields reveals a broader headwind to U.S.
biotechnology competitiveness and U.S. technology
competitiveness generally: the nation’s broken immi-
gration system. In 2022, temporary visa holders earned
64 percent of doctorates in computer and information
sciences, 57 percent of doctorates in engineering, and
25 percent of doctorates in biological and biomedical
sciences. In 2015, across biological, agricultural, and
environmental sciences, foreign students represented
15 percent of the workforce with a bachelor’s degree,
27 percent of workers with a master’s degree, and 47
percent of the workforce with a PhD (this includes
naturalized immigrants and permanent residents,
not just visa holders). The last time the U.S. Congress
meaningfully reformed its immigration system was in
1990. Country caps—a policy dating to the 1960s—suffo-
cate America’s access to high-tech talent and have fed a
backlog of 1.4 million people waiting for green cards.171
It would be a mistake to take U.S. high-tech immigration
for granted. As demand for biotechnology grows abroad,
along with strong inducements from talent-hungry gov-
ernments, so will opportunities for top foreign talent to
remain abroad.
Average
Faster
Faster
Faster
Faster
Faster
Much Faster
Faster
Faster
Natural sciences, mathematics, and statistics Agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and veterinary
Information and communication technologies Health and welfare
Engineering, manufacturing, and construction
18.000
16.000
14.000
12.000
10.000
8.000
6.000
4.000
2.000
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Stagnation in U.S. Doctorate (or Equivalent) Recipients Across Biotechnology Sectors
Biotechnology Job Growth Outpaces the Broader Economy
Source: “OECD Data Explorer,” Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, accessed September 20, 2024, https://data-explorer.oecd.org .
Source: “Occupational Outlook Handbook,” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, August 29, 2024, https://www.bls.gov/ooh .
U.S. Occupation Employment Growth Rate Growth Rate Relative to All U.S. Occupations
All U.S. occupations
Biochemists and biophysicists
Bioengineers and biomedical
engineers
Biological technicians
Chemical and material scientists
Chemical engineers
Computer and information research
scientists
Clinical laboratory technologists and
technicians
Database administrators and
architects
3%
7%
5%
5%
6%
8%
23%
3%
8%

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
@CNASDC
28
To unleash the U.S. biotechnology sector, it will take
more ambitious efforts across government, academia,
and the private sector to foster and fund biotechnolo-
gy-relevant skills, training, and careers to match expected
demand.
Biodata
The United States will struggle to maintain its
biotechnology leadership without reforms to unlock the
potential of its biodata. Data is perhaps the United States’
biggest untapped biotechnology asset, comparable to the
nation sitting on a massive gold mine it is blocked from
accessing by its own rules and regulations.172
Given the breadth of the bioeconomy, driving research
and innovation requires access to a broad range of
data. This includes conventional biodata that describes
the genomes, nucleic acid transcripts, proteins, and
metabolites of living organisms from humans to plants
to microbes.173 It also includes nutrition, agricultural,
environmental, satellite, and industrial data, which can
combine with conventional biodata to surface insights
about new medical treatments, pharmaceuticals, energy
sources, climate-resistant crops, and novel biomanufac-
turing processes. The greatest biotechnology insights will
emerge from analysis of diverse datasets.174
The challenge for the United States, however, is both
a lack of biotechnology-relevant data and integrated,
structured, and secure access to that data for research,
development, and innovation. The United States continues
to amass significant biodata and associated metadata from
a range of sources, including government agencies and
a combination of federally funded and private research-
ers.175 Increasingly advanced tools and research methods
have also increased the complexity of available biodata.
The collapsing cost of gene sequencing in particular has
led to a proliferation of epigenomic data by companies
such as 23andMe and Ancestry, which now have the gene
sequences of an estimated 26 million people worldwide.176
Another driver of proliferating biodata is the transi-
tion among health providers to electronic health records
(EHRs), which now number more than 250 million.177
However, EHRs are typically managed by private software
firms, which have a strong profit incentive to amass data.
Indeed, expectations by these firms that advancements
in AI and biotechnology will substantially increase the
Data is perhaps the United States’
biggest untapped biotechnology asset.
commercial value of their underlying data has encouraged
further hoarding and consolidation.178
The federal government has also seized on the col-
lapsing cost of gene sequencing to drive several efforts
to securely amass biodata and make it available. NIH’s
All of Us Research Program seeks to build a diverse,
voluntary database of Americans’ health information for
internal and legitimate third-party research. So far, the
program has made more than 287 ,000 EHRs and 245,000
whole genome sequences available for researchers.179
The All of Us database is high quality and growing, but it
remains relatively small. NIH also houses the Genomic
Data Commons, which provides cancer researchers with
a unified repository of “standardized cancer genomic
data sets.”180 Another major effort is the Department of
Veterans Affairs’ Million Veteran Program, which has
collected voluntary health and genetic information from
a million veterans for research to improve veterans’
health and support new treatments.181 It is now one of
the world’s largest research programs for studying the
relationship between genes and human health.182 The
USDA’s Agricultural Research Service (ARS) also boasts
“the world’s largest collection of agricultural information,”
including significant genetic data on plants and animals
through its National Agricultural Library.183
The federal government has taken some steps to
increase publicly available biodata. This began with the
Office of Science and Technology Policy’s (OSTP’s) 2013
Public Access Memorandum and continued with its
2022 memorandum on “Ensuring Free, Immediate, and
Equitable Access to Federally Funded Research,” which
outlines steps to make federally supported scientific data,
including biodata, publicly available.184
Still, biotechnology-relevant data today is generally
not findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable
(FAIR).185 The proliferation of biodata, however, has
created an increasingly complex and siloed data landscape
as researchers and developers follow their own practices
for data collection, labeling, storage, access, and security.
In some cases, missing metadata raises quality concerns.
In others, misaligned standards for labeling, access, or
security constrain researchers’ abilities to share, inte-
grate, validate, and use different data types. Cleaning and
curating data from disparate sources is also costly and time
intensive, creating another barrier to research, develop-
ment, and innovation. Despite these challenges, there
remains no coordinated national effort to develop interop-
erable tools or uniform standards for biodata. Efforts to
integrate and even consolidate datasets, however, must
also guard against heightened cybersecurity risks from
data poisoning, reidentification, and exfiltration.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
29
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
At the same time, it is not enough to simply amass
biodata. The data must be securely stored, structured,
labeled, secured, and analyzed, which requires signifi-
cant resources for digital infrastructure, computational
resources, trained personnel, and cybersecurity.186
The required resources will only grow as relevant data
becomes more abundant and heterogeneous over time.
All of this points to significant headwinds for the
United States’ abilities to identify, develop, and com-
mercialize biotechnology discoveries. The fragmented,
disorganized landscape of U.S. biodata is not the only
challenge. The United States must also find a way to
unleash its biodata without compromising its com-
mitment to privacy and civil rights. This necessitates
a strategy for using deidentified health and genomic
data, in which personally identifiable markers of the
data have been removed. But herein lies a major chal-
lenge: there is considerable ambiguity about who owns
deidentified patient data in the United States.187
HIPAA is generally understood to give patients own-
ership of their medical data. However, it has less to say
about who owns that data once it has been deidentified,
or how companies should be compensated for using
it.188 This ambiguity has incentivized data hoarding by
private firms, which remain unsure about if and how
they can sell their data, which in turn undercuts data
sharing and life sciences research.
Another challenge for U.S. biodata is retention.
Valuable biodata is often deleted after several years as
health providers comply with various state laws that
require deletion or compliance with HIPAA’s require-
ments for appropriate data safeguards. Generally, AI
tools can extract more value from more data, so the
deletion of health data over time can undercut future
insights and innovation. At the same time, publicly
funded databases such as NIH’s National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) are not struc-
tured to absorb the full range of biodata, which has
grown both in volume and complexity as increas-
ingly powerful sequencing platforms emerge. The
United States’ failure to develop and fund permanent
infrastructure that can handle the nation’s growing
biodata results in the needless deletion or siloing of
this critical asset.
Finally, the United States must balance its historic
commitment to open data—including biodata—with
risks of exploitation by China. The United States has
promoted open, scientific research going back more
than 200 years to the founding of the National Library
of Medicine. This commitment is foundational to NIH,
which has long made scientific information accessible
to researchers through publicly accessible databases.
The United States’ commitment to open science has
accelerated research and discovery while reinforcing
scientific norms around openness, transparency, and
accessibility around the world. But some competi-
tors such as China never fully embraced that model.
Although China has amassed global biodata through
open sources and other licit and illicit means, it has
not made its own biodata publicly available, even as it
pursues a well-resourced, coordinated effort to collect
and organize its biodata assets in a bid for global bio-
technology dominance. The February 2024 Executive
Order on Preventing Access to Americans’ Bulk Sensitive
Personal Data and United States Government-Related
Data by Countries of Concern restricted China’s access
to American biodata and was an overdue and welcome
step.189 Still, absent further efforts to better organize and
unleash U.S. biodata, China will likely be in a stronger
position to apply advanced AI tools to its existing biodata
resources, with the potential to supercharge its biotech-
nology research and innovation. In the age of AI, nations
with large, structured, accessible, and secure life science
databases will enjoy a significant and potentially decisive
advantage in biotechnology.
To its credit, the Biden administration has made
important progress in elevating the importance of data
in driving U.S. biotechnology leadership. In December
2023, the Interagency Working Group on Data for the
Bioeconomy and the National Science and Technology
Council released a report identifying many of the key
problems described above. The report made a strong
case for making “data FAIR across domains, removing
unnecessary siloes that limit data sharing, integration,
and utilization.”190 It also called for an “interoperable,
networked data fabric” supported by robust, stable
In the age of AI, nations with large,
structured, accessible, and secure
life science databases will enjoy a
significant and potentially decisive
advantage in biotechnology.
The United States must also find a
way to unleash its biodata without
compromising its commitment to
privacy and civil rights.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
@CNASDC
30
federal funding for the digital infrastructure, compu-
tational resources, and trained personnel required to
make the most of government-owned and federally
funded biodata.191
Public Trust
A final but less understood headwind to U.S.
biotechnology leadership is eroding public trust
and growing partisan polarization around scientific
expertise. Analysis of the 2022 General Social Survey by
the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs
Research shows that the percentage of adults with “a
great deal of confidence” in the scientific community
fell from 48 percent in 2018 to just 39 percent in
2022.192 Politically charged debates over the extent of
pandemic-era restrictions likely fueled this trend: in
2018, 45 percent of Republicans expressed a great deal
of confidence in the scientific community, but by 2022,
the number had fallen to 22 percent.193 The same year,
the share of Republicans who expressed a great deal of
confidence in medicine fell to just 26 percent.194 A May
2023 survey showed that just 69 percent of Americans
have trust in scientists to act in the public’s best interest,
declining from 86 percent in January 2019 (trust in
medical scientists declined from 89 percent to 75 percent
over the same period).195 Partisan polarization around
vaccines has been especially acute. Among Republicans,
67 percent have concerns about serious adverse effects of
vaccines, compared to only 27 percent of Democrats.196
Although partisan polarization around COVID-19
vaccines offers a more recent example of public backlash
to biotechnologies, genetically modified organisms
(GMOs) offer another cautionary tale. Despite global
scientific consensus about the safety and value of GMOs,
considerable public skepticism remains nearly three
decades after GMOs became broadly available for public
consumption. A 2015 survey from the Pew Research
Center found that, while 88 percent of scientists thought
genetically modified (GM) foods were safe to eat, just
37 percent of the public agreed.197 The public’s views
seemed to worsen over time, with a 2020 Pew survey
finding that just 27 percent of Americans viewed GM
foods as safe to eat. Skepticism of GM foods is global;
across the 20 countries surveyed by Pew, a median of
just 13 percent said GM foods were safe, compared to 48
percent who viewed them as unsafe.198
If the American public remains skeptical about GM
foods three decades after their introduction, it is rea-
sonable to assume significant public skepticism of more
interventionist, science fiction–like biotechnologies such
as human gene editing and human-machine interfaces.
Strong and sustained public investment in biotechnol-
ogies will require, at a minimum, the absence of intense
public opposition, and ideally, robust and stable public
support. If powerful commercial interests in sectors such
as agriculture, defense, energy, mining, plastics, textiles,
or heavy industry view biotechnologies as potential
threats to their business model—instead of as market
opportunities—it could engender organized opposition
that risks stifling public investment and policy.
Summary
The United States occupies one of the strongest positions
to lead the biorevolution. Its dynamic capital markets,
innovative private sector, world-leading higher education
institutions, and unrivaled STEM talent bestow
tremendous advantages. To secure U.S. biotechnology
leadership, however, Washington must act with urgency
to intensify tailwinds and diminish headwinds. In the
meantime, U.S. competitors race to close the gap.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Biopower Abroad
Chapter 03
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
@CNASDC
32
C
ountries worldwide have awoken to the promise
of biotechnologies, and many are pursuing
ambitious strategies to secure their places in
the biorevolution. Securing America’s place as the
global biopower requires a clear-eyed assessment of
its competition abroad in a fast-changing landscape.
Strengthening U.S. biotechnology leadership also
demands an appreciation for its global context: biolog-
ical research, assets, supply chains, capital, and human
talent often cross national jurisdictions, along with
biotechnology-enabled dangers such as novel pathogens,
GM invasive species, and even the export of totalitarian
biosurveillance to enable social control.
 This section surveys the emerging global architecture
for biotechnology—including bilateral, plurilateral, and
regional initiatives—and analyzes the strengths and
weaknesses of key biopowers abroad, including the EU,
Belgium, France, Switzerland, the UK, Japan, South
Korea, and China.
Global Architecture

The global architecture for biotechnology—the
international and multilateral laws, policies, and
norms—remains embryonic. The domestic struggle to
define and govern biotechnology and the bioeconomy
compounds at the international level, with different
nations adopting definitions that reflect their
biotechnology ambitions, priorities, and concerns.
Although this divergence is natural given the sector’s
breadth and relatively early stage of development, some
convergence and consensus around definitions, terms,
metrics, and norms is necessary to begin constructing a
global biotechnology architecture.
The divergence begins with definitions. For instance,
the term “bioeconomy” features prominently in stra-
tegic plans for Brazil, China, Germany, the EU, South
Africa, and the United States. By contrast, Australia,
Belgium, and New Zealand reference the bioeco-
nomy primarily as a means to achieve sustainability
objectives.199 Other technology-leading nations such
as Canada, India, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, and
the UK do not define the bioeconomy in major policy
documents.200 The terminological inconsistency in
national policies reflects the lack of global consensus
about both the definition and the strategic importance
of biotechnology and the bioeconomy.
At the international level, there is no compre-
hensive governance regime for biotechnology. The
first major, related international agreement was the
1972 Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), which
effectively prohibited the development, acquisition,
and use of biological weapons.201 At the same time, the
BWC acknowledged the value of biological research
for peaceful purposes in areas such as agriculture and
medicine, and it encouraged international cooperation
in these domains. Although the BWC established a
robust and broadly stable international norm against
biological weapons, it continues to lack a binding
verification mechanism—a weakness underscored
by the exposure of biological weapons programs in
the Soviet Union, Iraq, and North Korea. The agree-
ment also failed to address the threat from nonstate
actors who could employ dual-use technology
to make bioweapons.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
33
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Two decades later, the international community
passed another significant agreement related to bio-
technology: the 1992 United Nations Convention on
Biological Diversity (CBD).202 The Convention focused
on conserving biological diversity and ensuring the
sustainability of biological resources, including genetic
resources. To that end, it established a global frame-
work to promote fair and equitable access to and use of
genetic resources. Disagreement about whether signato-
ries have fulfilled this commitment remains a source of
international contention.
In 2000, the international community supplemented
the CBD with the Cartagena Protocol, which regulates
the transnational movement of organisms modified by
modern biotechnologies, such as animals and plants,
that may harm biological diversity and human health.203
A decade later, the international community again
amended the CBD with the Nagoya Protocol, which
established a mechanism for the fair and equitable
sharing of benefits from the use of genetic resources.204
The CBD and its subsequent protocols helped facilitate
a global market for biotechnology products by estab-
lishing a framework that emphasized safety, public input,
national consent, and information sharing.
To date, the international community’s only agree-
ments governing bioethics are the nonbinding Universal
Declaration on the Human Genome and Human Rights
and the International Declaration on Human Genetic
Data, which the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) adopted in 1997
and 2003, respectively.205 The 1997 declaration provided
the first universal framework for ethical human genetic
research, clinical practices, and policymaking. Notably,
it emphasized that research must “fully respect human
dignity” and prohibited discrimination based on genetic
characteristics and the reproductive cloning of humans.
The 2003 declaration reemphasized many of these
principles and promoted norms around international
collaboration, responsible genetic research and genetic
data handling, and equitable access to the benefits of
genetics-related research. Both declarations remain
cornerstones of the emerging global architecture for
responsible genetic research. Although it is nonbinding,
the World Health Organization (WHO) released a frame-
work in 2022 for the responsible use of life sciences,
which included recommendations for member states to
limit biorisks and govern dual-use research.206
Limited activity at the international level has not
stopped organic, global efforts to promote biotechnology
cooperation, research, and innovation. For instance,
the Global Alliance for Genomics & Health (GA4GH)
is an international nonprofit that convenes leading
health care, research, ethics, government, life sciences,
and technology organizations to promote consensus
around standards, policy frameworks, and tools for
genomic medicine.207 Another international nonprofit,
the International Genetically Engineered Machine
(iGEM), helps cultivate global talent and norms in syn-
thetic biology through an annual competition in which
students from around the world develop and demon-
strate applications of synthetic biology.208 International
declarations and initiatives such as iGEM and GA4GH
may not be legally binding, but they have helped to raise
global awareness and cooperation about biotechnology
applications and to reinforce norms around responsible
research and use.
Bilateral, Plurilateral, and Regional
Initiatives

Bilateral, plurilateral, and regional initiatives have also
formed as part of an emerging global architecture for
biotechnology. In 2017 , Brazil, Russia, India, China, and
South Africa (BRICS) launched the BRICS Working
Group on Biotechnology and Biomedicine to promote
collaboration on biotechnology R&D.209 The Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) first established
a Working Group on Biotechnology in 1983 and has
recently focused on biotechnology applications for
agriculture, convening a workshop in Jakarta, Indonesia,
in March 2024 with support from the U.S. government.210
At the bilateral level, no major agreements focus
exclusively on biotechnology. Instead, biotechnology has
fallen within broader bilateral agreements concerning
R&D, trade, and technology cooperation. Australia and
Singapore, for instance, concluded a Digital Economy
Agreement in 2020 that established a framework
for digital trade to promote cross-border dataflow,
reduce barriers to digital trade, strengthen intellec-
tual property (IP) protection, and promote standards
harmonization—all of which are essential to stronger
biotechnology-related cooperation.211
Transatlantic biotechnology cooperation stretches
back to 1990 with the creation of the EC-U.S. Task Force
on Biotechnology Research between the European
Commission (EC) and the United States, which provided
a forum for coordination and discussion between
European and U.S. researchers on biotechnology appli-
cations for the public benefit.212 The U.S.-EU Trade and
Technology Council (TTC), launched in 2021, advances

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
@CNASDC
34
transatlantic governance of critical and emerging tech-
nologies rooted in shared democratic values. Although
one of the TTC’s working groups on technology stan-
dards cooperation included biotechnology, the TTC did
not explicitly reference biotechnology cooperation and
promoting the bioeconomy as a priority until its sixth
ministerial meeting in April 2024.213
Transatlantic biotechnology cooperation has often
encountered differences in regulatory, policy, and nor-
mative barriers concerning GMOs. The United States has
adopted a more market-driven approach, with producers
widely adopting GM crops and livestock, while the EU
maintains far stricter regulations that reflect considerable
public concerns about the alleged health and environ-
mental impacts of GMOs. Proactively anticipating similar
divergences for future biotechnology applications—espe-
cially for any GM products and services in agriculture and
health—could minimize transatlantic regulatory gaps and
points of friction that could impede cooperation.
Multilateral security partnerships have also increased
their focus on biotechnology as part of a broader
emphasis on critical and emerging technologies. NATO
first identified biotechnologies and human enhancement
(BHE) technologies as a priority technology area in 2019
and released the first international strategy to govern
BHE development and use in April 2024.214 The strategy
calls for enhanced biotechnology investment and col-
laboration to improve production of defense-relevant
materials, inputs, and capabilities. Thus far, concrete
efforts appear limited to developing risk and impact
assessment toolkits, promoting education and awareness
of BHEs, and fast-tracking select BHE technologies.
In 2021, NATO launched the Defence Innovation
Accelerator for the North Atlantic (DIANA) to run com-
petitive challenges for industry to develop “deep tech
dual-use technologies” for critical defense and security
problems.215 The next year, the alliance also launched the
NATO Innovation Fund (NIF), a more than $1 billion,
multisovereign VC fund to make long-term investments
in start-ups developing defense and security-re-
lated technologies.216 Both initiatives have prioritized
biotechnologies.217
In September 2021, the United States, the United
Kingdom, and Australia announced a trilateral security
partnership called AUKUS.218 Pillar II of the partnership
calls for enhancing joint capabilities and interoperability
in key emerging technologies. Although the initial Joint
Leaders Statement did not single out biotechnology
as a focus, it remains ripe for cooperation—especially
given the biotechnology leadership of the United States
and the UK.
Another promising venue for biotechnology coopera-
tion is the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue between the
United States, India, Japan, and Australia, also known
as the Quad. In May 2023, leaders of the Quad launched
the Quad Investors Network (QUIN), an independent
body to facilitate cooperation, innovation, and techno-
logical development across the four technology-leading
nations.219 Across the four governments, QUIN convenes
investors, businesses, and governments to facilitate joint
ventures and co-investments in strategically important
technologies, including biotechnology.
The growing trilateral partnership between the United
States, Japan, and the Republic of Korea is another ripe
opportunity to strengthen joint biotechnology research,
development, and investment. All three countries have
a clear interest in strengthening their biotechnology
sectors, and leaders should launch a trilateral biotech-
nology industry working group and negotiate a trilateral
biotechnology cooperation agreement outlining oppor-
tunities for joint investment, trade, and talent exchange,
as well as policy and regulatory harmonization.220
The trilateral partnership recently joined forces with
the EU and India to launch the Biopharma Coalition
(Bio-5) in June 2024 to boost biopharmaceutical supply
chain resilience, with an initial focus on active pharma-
ceutical ingredients that are now predominantly sourced
from China. The White House’s announcement of Bio-5
also laid the groundwork for future coordination on
policy, regulation, and R&D.221
A Survey of Global Biopowers

To date, at least 49 countries have developed strategies
related to the bioeconomy, but only a few have the
combination of natural strengths and ambitious policies
and investments to reach the higher tiers of national
biopower.222 Among them, only China stands as a serious
rival to surpass the United States as the global biopower,
although the United Kingdom and South Korea stand
out for punching far above their weights, with France,
Belgium, Switzerland, and Japan also making impressive
progress. Each holds lessons for U.S. policymakers.
Many competing biopowers, including Japan and
South Korea, rolled out detailed biotechnology strat-
egies years ago. The UK has gone further, introducing
a strategy in 2023 specifically for engineering biology.
South Korea’s recent strategy leans into specialization by
focusing on “digital biotechnology” at the intersection
of biotechnology, data, and AI. Most important, these
nations have paired new strategies with new funding

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
35
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
for implementation. The EU’s Bio-Based Industries
Joint Undertaking (BBI JU), a public-private partner-
ship to accelerate novel biobased solutions, came with
a nearly $4 billion mobilization.223 France’s Innovation
Santé 2030 initiative devoted nearly $7 .5 billion to boost
health care innovation.224
Funding is necessary but insufficient; biotechnology
data and infrastructure also matter. The UK leads the
world in responsibly consolidating biodata and making
it accessible for research and innovation through the UK
Biobank. The UK also has started to build cutting-edge
R&D infrastructure, including laboratories, testbeds, and
factories, to bridge the gap between research and busi-
ness-critical technologies.225 Switzerland highlights the
power of cultivating biotechnology “clusters” that con-
centrate research, industry, and capital, while Belgium
underscores the importance of a favorable regulatory
environment and public-private collaboration.
Biotechnology policy, investments, and activity abroad
continue to grow, offering both examples and cautionary
tales for U.S. policymakers. Below is a brief survey of
leading global biopowers and their latest biotechnology
developments and challenges.
The European Union
The EU has recognized the need to balance its historic
emphasis on safety and regulation with biotechnology’s
potential for other priorities such as health, sustainability,
climate change, and economic security. Biotechnology
is one of the fastest-growing industries in the EU,
contributing $33 billion to its GDP and creating nearly
211,000 direct jobs across the economy in 2018.226
Between 2008 and 2018, the EU’s biotechnology sector
grew twice as fast as its economy.227 The EU also boasts
a strong life science research base—with high-quality
health, agricultural, and industrial biotechnology
publications.
In 2012, the EU adopted a bioeconomy strategy
that focused on addressing “the ecological, environ-
mental, energy, food supply and natural resource
challenges” Europe faces.228 The strategy featured a
12-step Bioeconomy Action Plan that called for, among
other initiatives, greater investment, multidisciplinary
research, and human capital; increased synergy between
Many competing biopowers,
including Japan and South Korea,
rolled out detailed biotechnology
strategies years ago.
bioeconomy-related policies; and standards develop-
ment for biobased products to support new markets and
help scale the European bioeconomy. A 2018 review of
the strategy found that it had successfully mobilized
research and investment funding, spurring shifts among
member states to recognize the bioeconomy’s potential
and supporting new standards for biobased products.229
At the same time, it called for steps to further mobilize
investments, ensure a stable regulatory environment, and
promote policy coherence.
A key driver of the EU bioeconomy has been Horizon
2020, a roughly $84 billion research and innovation fund
that ran from 2014 to 2020.230 One of its principal objec-
tives was promoting European science and R&D, and it
funded various biotechnology-related projects.231 The
effort will continue through 2027 as Horizon Europe,
which further emphasizes sustainability and climate
change in alignment with the European Green Deal,
which seeks to make the EU carbon neutral by 2050.
Arguably, Horizon 2020’s most significant contribu-
tion to the European bioeconomy was the establishment
of the BBI JU—a partnership between the EU and
industry to accelerate innovation, development, and
deployment of novel biobased solutions. Between 2014
and 2021, the BBI JU mobilized nearly $4 billion.232 The
initiative rebranded as the Circular Bio-Based Europe
Joint Undertaking (CBE JU) to emphasize the role of
biobased products in promoting a sustainable, circular
bioeconomy aligned with the European Green Deal.233
To date, the effort has supported several projects,
from exploring the use of microorganisms and newly
designed enzymes to “eat” otherwise nonbiodegradable
plastics to an effort to use lignin—an abundant natural
polymer found in most plants—to replace certain petro-
leum-based polymers used in textiles and other fabrics.234
In March 2024, the European Commission issued a
communication regarding “Building the Future with
Nature: Boosting Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing
in the EU.”235 The document called for establishing an
EU Biotech Hub by the end of 2024 to help researchers
and businesses navigate regulations, new funding
mechanisms to support EU biotechnology and bio-
manufacturing, and additional steps to streamline EU
regulations. These steps could lay the groundwork for a
future EU Biotech Act in the next few years, like the EU’s
recently adopted AI Act.236
The communication identified three headwinds to the
EU’s biotechnology leadership. First, EU biotechnology
companies struggle to transition from lab research to
commercialization, owing to the diffusion of biotech-
nology talent across member states and the dearth of
world-leading biotechnology centers of excellence.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
@CNASDC
36
Second, it cited complex and lengthy permitting pro-
cesses, and the patchwork of regulations between the
member state and EU levels. For example, it takes up to
three times as long to approve a biological plant protec-
tion product in the EU as it does in the United States.
Finally, the communication noted challenges for biotech-
nology start-ups in accessing finance. The long-term,
uncertain outlook of biotechnology firms is often at odds
with the traditional, loan-based financing through banks
more common in the EU. The EU’s fragmented capital
market also deprives later-stage firms of accessing the
larger amounts of VC required to scale.
Although not explicitly tied to biotechnology, the EU’s
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) strictly reg-
ulates the processing of personal data, including genetic
data, in biotechnologies.237 GDPR is a double-edged
sword for the EU, as it provides a clear legal regime for
the acquisition, use, and security of biodata and genetic
data. This could in turn foster greater public trust that
public and private researchers are using such data
responsibly. On the other hand, the GDPR’s strict rules
for data processing, anonymization, and consent may
limit valuable uses of biodata for R&D. By contrast, the
lack of significant U.S. rules governing biodata—and the
absence of a U.S. national privacy law generally—under-
mines cooperation with like-minded partners such as
the EU, which has much stronger protections under the
GDPR.
In short, the EU retains significant biotechnology
strengths—a strong life science research base and
educated workforce; clear policy ambitions for bio-
technology concerning climate change, sustainability,
and economic security; relative regulatory clarity for
processing health and genetic data; and significant
natural resources for a circular bioeconomy. However,
its long-term biotechnology competitiveness will hinge
on whether it can maintain these strengths while over-
coming challenges related to the diffusion of capital,
talent, policy, and regulation across member states.
The clear biotechnology leaders within Europe are
Belgium, France, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
 ¡ Strong life science research base
 ¡ Highly educated workforce
 ¡ Biotechnology ambitions linked to broadly
popular goals such as economic security,
sustainability, and fighting climate change
 ¡ Transition from lab research to
commercialization
 ¡ Lack of world-leading biotechnology
centers of excellence
 ¡ Lengthy permitting and complex,
overlapping regulations
 ¡ Diffuse talent and capital markets across
member states makes labor and financing
a challenge for start-ups
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Biopower: The European Union

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
37
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Belgium
Belgium punches far above its weight for biotechnology,
owing to a favorable regulatory environment, strong
research infrastructure, and a culture of collaboration
between government and industry.238 The country
is home to more than 140 biotechnology companies,
representing 7 percent of all such European
companies.239 Belgium also accounts for almost 10
percent of Europe’s biotechnology R&D spending,
representing just 2.6 percent of the EU’s total
population.240 Belgium’s biotechnology leadership
benefits from a robust research infrastructure with more
than 23 incubators, 19 research parks, and 8 universities,
including biotechnology-forward institutions such
as KU Leuven.241 Belgium is also home to a robust
biopharmaceutical industry—owing to its high-quality
academic and research infrastructure—with more than
70 hospitals, nationwide research centers, and high-
quality researchers.242 A 2018 Belgium law also improved
the regulatory environment by enabling rapid approval
procedures for clinical trials, which can take as little as
two weeks.243 Worldwide, Belgium ranks 9th for total
patent filings per capita, propelled recently by a thriving
biotechnology sector that saw a 28 percent increase in
patent applications from 2022 to 2023.244
France
France is a biotechnology leader, owing to longtime
strength in health care innovation and robust
government funding.245 The country is home to 820
biotechnology companies, including world-leading
biopharmaceutical companies such as Sanofi at
the vanguard of global vaccine development and
deployment.246 Paris has emerged as a hub for European
biotechnology start-ups, including DNA Script, one of
the world’s first companies to develop benchtop DNA
printers.247 In 2021, the French government boosted
its biotechnology sector through Innovation Santé
2030, which aims to reinvigorate and secure France’s
leadership in health care innovation with nearly $7 .5
billion in funding to boost biomedical research to
accelerate new therapies and technologies, invest in
priority areas including biotherapies and bioproduction,
and streamline regulatory processes for clinical trials,
among other steps.248 France is also home to several
biotechnology research clusters and leading research
institutions, from the renowned Institut Pasteur, which
focuses on biomedical research, to Genopole, a biocluster
south of Paris focused on genetics, genomics, and
biotechnology.249 Despite substantial public investment,
two-thirds of all French biotechnology companies
cite access to capital as their top challenge, followed
by hurdles in developing industrial partnerships and
overcoming regulation.250
 ¡ Favorable regulatory environment
 ¡ Strong research infrastructure and public
R&D spending
 ¡ Culture of collaboration between
government and industry
 ¡ Relatively small domestic market
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Biopower: Belgium
 ¡ Robust health and pharmaceutical sector
 ¡ Paris is an emerging hub for biotechnology
start-ups
 ¡ Strong public investment through
Innovation Santé 2030
 ¡ Underdeveloped industrial partnerships
 ¡ Access to capital
 ¡ Complex regulation
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Biopower: France

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
@CNASDC
38
Switzerland
Like Belgium, Switzerland overperforms in
biotechnology relative to its size. Switzerland’s financial
stability, robust international partnerships, strong
scientific research industry, and pro-innovation culture
propel this leadership. This dynamic benefits not only
biotechnology but innovation broadly, explaining why
the World Intellectual Property Organization has placed
Switzerland at the top of its Global Innovation Index
for the past 13 years.251 Indeed, life sciences has been
Switzerland’s top export sector since 2013. The Swiss
biotechnology sector has thrived under these conditions.
Capital investments grew substantially during the
pandemic and, in 2023, Switzerland’s biotechnology
sector posted record revenues of more than $8 billion
and raised nearly $2.25 billion, a 50 percent increase
over the previous year.252 Switzerland is also in the top 10
nations worldwide for biotechnology patents, although
its relative share is dwarfed by the United States, China,
Japan, and South Korea.253 Biotech clusters, including
the BioValley in Basel, the Biopole in Lausanne, and
the Technopark in Zurich, have also driven Swiss
biotechnology leadership by concentrating capital, life
sciences research, and start-ups while fostering cultures
of innovation and collaboration.254 Novartis and Roche
are also world-leading biopharmaceutical companies,
pushing the frontier in areas such as biotherapeutics and
personalized medicine.255
The United Kingdom
The UK ranks among the top global biopowers.256 It has a
strong scientific and research tradition, with 2 of the top
10 universities in the world—Oxford and Cambridge.257
U.S. News & World Report ranks Cambridge as the
fifth-best university for biotechnology and applied
microbiology worldwide.258 In 2021, Cambridge’s
renowned Biomedical Campus alone added roughly $2.8
billion to the UK economy.259
Together with London, the cities of Oxford and
Cambridge form the so-called Golden Triangle for life
sciences, concentrating world-class talent, research
facilities, and access to private capital and government
policymakers.260 The UK’s excellent scientific and
research base produces almost one-third of all European
scientific journal publications and leads peers in Europe
in total life sciences publications.261 The nation also leads
European peers in total new biotechnology start-ups and
funding. Between 2018 and 2020, VC and IPO funding
in the UK totaled around $3.3 billion, dwarfing the
next-highest nation—Switzerland.262 The country also
saw twice as many biotechnology companies founded,
compared to peers in Switzerland and France.263
According to a 2021 analysis from McKinsey &
Company, the UK beats the United States, the EU, and
China in biotechnology-related scientific publications
and approved patents.264 The same analysis places the
UK second, behind only the United States, in overall
biotechnology innovation.265
The biotechnology sector is a thriving and highly
productive part of the UK economy. Life sciences is
among the country’s most successful sectors, valued
at roughly $132 billion in 2021.266 Two of the country’s
largest companies are biopharmaceutical compa-
nies—GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and AstraZeneca, the
latter achieving global acclaim for its breakthrough
COVID-19 vaccine.267
UK biotechnology leadership is underpinned by stra-
tegic policies, investments, and initiatives. In 2011, the
government introduced a Strategy for UK Life Sciences,
which aspired to make the nation the “global hub for life
sciences” with a focus on building a collaborative life
sciences ecosystem, expanding the talent pipeline, and
facilitating innovation in healthcare.268 Despite stiff com-
petition in life sciences, the UK has fared well.
The UK is now considered a world leader in genomic
research.269 This claim rests largely on the success of
the UK Biobank, arguably the nation’s most impressive
national asset for biotechnology leadership. The UK
Biobank, which began as a public-private partnership
 ¡ Robust international partnerships
 ¡ Strong scientific research base
 ¡ Pro-innovation culture and regulatory
environment
 ¡ Intense competition for skilled labor and
capital
 ¡ Dependence on international talent
 ¡ High-cost market
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Biopower: Switzerland

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
39
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
in 2006, is a large-scale biomedical database that
includes the fully sequenced genetic codes of 500,000
volunteers.270 The biobank makes this wealth of genetic
data available to bona fide academic or commercial
researchers to advance research in the public interest.
The UK Biobank is a critical national asset for biotech-
nology R&D, especially in health applications.
In 2013, the UK also launched the 100,000 Genomes
Project. By 2018, the project had fully sequenced 100,000
genomes from National Health Service patients, with
the hope of creating a large enough genetic database to
drive further research and innovation.271 The project
also resulted in the National Genomic Research Library,
which includes de-identified samples, genomic data, and
other health data that researchers can securely access.272
In recent years, the UK government has introduced
several initiatives to reinforce its biotechnology lead-
ership. In 2021, the government introduced its Life
Sciences Vision outlining a national industrial strategy
to secure UK leadership in what it called one of “the
most valuable and strategically important” sectors for
the economy.273 Among other steps, the Life Sciences
Vision called for developing the UK’s science and clinical
research infrastructure and better leveraging its genomic
and health data.
The UK government has also funded the Catapult
Network—a national network of cutting-edge R&D infra-
structure from laboratories to testbeds to factories that
helps bridge the gap between research and business-crit-
ical technologies, including cell and gene therapy and
medicine discovery.274 The UK’s Advanced Research and
Invention Agency, which supports high-risk, high-re-
ward breakthrough technologies, has also invested in
neural-machine interfaces and plant engineering.275
In 2023, the government published a National Vision
for Engineering Biology, which laid out policy direction
for government investment, regulation, and reform.276
The National Vision outlined several steps, including a
roughly $2.6 billion investment over the next decade,
to drive engineering biology R&D.277 Later that year, the
government announced a nearly $840 million investment
through the Life Sci for Growth package that unites 10
different policies, many of which will fortify the UK bio-
technology sector.278 This includes nearly $200 million
to upgrade the UK Biobank and $320 million to incen-
tivize pensions to invest in promising technology firms.279
More broadly, the UK government has increased public
spending on R&D for FY2024–2025 to its highest level
ever, at roughly $26 billion.280
In February 2024, UK Research and Innovation
(UKRI), a nondepartmental public body supported by
the government, also launched a roughly $130 million
fund to spur R&D in engineering biology.281 The fund
will support six new UKRI Engineering Biology Mission
Hubs nationwide, which will receive up to $15 million
over five years.282
Although the UK is, in many ways, a demonstration of
how renewed investment and strategic policy can bolster
biotechnology competitiveness, its biotechnology sector
is not without challenges. A relative lack of sophisti-
cation in biotechnologies in the UK’s VC community
compared to the United States, for instance, constricts
capital to promising biotechnology start-ups. Although
the UK has longtime strengths in genetic research and in
cell and gene therapy, it faces significant gaps in syn-
thetic biology, hence the renewed push for government
support. Bureaucratic approval processes for private or
commercial research funding also hamper innovation.
Nevertheless, the UK has not just talked about priori-
tizing biotechnology; its slew of policies, initiatives, and
investments demonstrates a resolve to act.
 ¡ Harnessing biodata through the UK
Biobank and 100,000 Genomes Project
 ¡ Detailed national strategies for life sciences
and engineering biology
 ¡ Policy incentives and public support for
biotechnology R&D, hubs, and private
investment
 ¡ Slow approval processes for private and
commercial research
 ¡ VCs less familiar with biotechnologies
 ¡ Relatively lagging in synthetic biology
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Biopower: The United Kingdom

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
@CNASDC
40
 ¡ Proactive government strategy and
significant public investment
 ¡ High public R&D spending, especially on
health applications
 ¡ Robust health and pharmaceutical industry,
with reputation for trust and quality
 ¡ Complex regulatory regime and slower
approval processes
 ¡ Biotechnology innovation concentrated in
a few large companies
 ¡ Risk-averse business and investment
culture
 ¡ Start-ups struggle to access capital
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Japan
Japan offers an interesting case of a government
embracing the biorevolution as an opportunity to
solve urgent social problems and reinvigorate its
technology leadership. With the world’s highest
proportion of elderly persons and one of the highest
longevity rates, the government faces a daunting rise
in health care expenditures and questions about how
to tap the strong domestic demand for new medical
treatments and pharmaceuticals. (Japan is the third-
largest pharmaceutical market in the world.283) At the
same time, the government seeks to boost its relatively
modest annual economic growth rates, fortify its critical
health care and pharmaceutical sectors, and continue
burnishing its global leadership in fighting climate
change and promoting environmental sustainability.
Tokyo views biotechnology as a potential solution
to all these problems—lowering health care costs
through new treatments, increasing economic growth
through a rejuvenated biopharmaceutical industry, and
protecting the environment through more sustainable
biobased materials.
Japan enters the biorevolution with many strengths.
It has the third-highest R&D spending on health among
OECD nations and boasts major health care companies,
such as Astellas Pharma, Eisai, and Takeda.284 The nation’s
pharmaceutical sector is nearly $83 billion and growing.285
Japanese companies also enjoy a reputation for trust,
quality, and reliability—all essential qualities for sensi-
tive biotechnology research and applications. Japan has
long pioneered key biotechnology-related applications,
such as CAR T-cell therapies, which transformed cancer
treatment.286 The nation is also a leader in regenerative
medicine and gene therapy research. Japan boasts the
largest bioinformatics database in Asia.287 Its biotech-
nology R&D focuses mostly on pharmaceutical and
medical applications, although industrial and agricul-
tural applications have earned renewed attention.288
Japan once led the world in biopharmaceuticals. In the
1980s, Japanese companies introduced 29 percent of all
new chemical entities approved by the FDA.289 Between
2011 and 2020, that share fell to just 7 percent.290 The
government is now working to reinvigorate the sector
with several initiatives. In 2019, Japan laid out its
Bioeconomy Strategy with ambitions to be “the world’s
most advanced bioeconomy” by 2030.291 The strategy
rests on three pillars: expanding the market for bio-
products, fostering “bio-communities” across Japan
(essentially, clusters of scientific, technological, and
business talent), and promoting data linkage to enable
cross-sectoral biotechnology innovation.292
In June 2022, the government of Japan also launched
the Grand Design Action Plan for a New Form of
Capitalism—the Kishida administration’s industrial
policy to both promote economic growth and solve social
problems.293 The initiative named biomanufacturing,
regenerative medicine, and gene therapies as key focus
areas.294 The same year, the government announced $700
million to increase support for start-ups by more than
10-fold.295 In 2023, the Japanese Ministry of Economy,
Trade and Industry also announced $3 billion over the
next decade to promote the biotechnology ecosystem,
with a focus on supporting Japanese start-ups in drug
discovery, regenerative medicine, cellular therapies,
and gene therapies.296
Japan’s biotechnology sector also faces considerable
challenges. In particular, the country’s start-up scene
remains underdeveloped and starved for capital. Last
year, Japanese VC and corporate investment in biotech-
nology companies was barely 3 percent of comparable
investments in the United States.297 Other challenges
include a risk-averse business culture, complex regula-
tory regimes, slow approval processes, and biotechnology
innovations concentrated in a few major companies.
Japan may have considerable advantages, but it also faces
significant headwinds to realize its potential.
Biopower: Japan

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
41
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
South Korea
South Korea has emerged as a global leader in
biotechnology, driven by its strong research and
innovation, cutting-edge technology and medical
infrastructure, highly educated workforce, and forward-
thinking government policy. South Korea boasts a
strong research and innovation base. Today, South
Korea is the second highest among OECD countries
for domestic spending on R&D.298 Broader government
R&D investment in biotechnology specifically increased
from $1.2 billion in 2007 to $3.4 billion in 2016. It has
continued thereafter, with the total share of government
R&D devoted to biotechnology rising from 15.7 percent
to 19.2 percent from 2016 to 2020.299 The investments
have paid off; today, South Korea ranks second globally
for biomedicine production. Its biotechnology workforce
continues to grow, along with its biotechnology exports,
which doubled between 2016 and 2018.300
South Korea’s robust biotechnology sector benefits
from a vibrant technology innovation ecosystem of
research institutes, universities, and major private
companies at the cutting edge of technology innova-
tion. Pillars of this ecosystem include Seoul National
University’s Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
which conducts cutting-edge life science research, and
the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
which focuses on synthetic biology and biomedical engi-
neering.301 In addition, the Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology—a government-supported
national think tank—conducts research in advanced
biotechnologies and provides education and training
programs, commercialization support for subject matter
experts, and public infrastructure in the form of state-of-
the-art research facilities.302
The innovation-friendly ecosystem has fueled South
Korea’s biotechnology sector. South Korea’s share of
patents filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty in
biotechnology industries grew from 4.2 percent of the
OECD total in 2009 to 7 .5 percent in 2017 .303 The country
also enjoys a robust start-up ecosystem, especially
compared to its neighbor Japan. Between 2010 and 2016,
the number of Korean biotechnology start-ups rose
from 140 to 440—a more than three-fold increase.304 The
Korean government has actively supported start-ups,
spending $1.2 billion in 2020 after accounting for total
direct and indirect investment.305
In addition to a robust start-up scene, South Korea has
several major biotechnology firms. Samsung BioLogics
has emerged as a global leader in contract development
and manufacturing organizations (CDMOs) and made
significant investments in cell-line development and
clinical manufacturing.306 LG Chem has made significant
investments to develop innovative drugs for complex
diseases such as diabetes and cancer.307 SK Bioscience,
which earned global attention for its work manufac-
turing COVID-19 vaccines during the pandemic, is also
expanding its biomanufacturing capacity to produce
next-generation vaccines at scale.308
In the last five years, the South Korean government
has introduced a raft of biotechnology-related policies.
In May 2019, it introduced the Innovative Strategy for the
Biohealth Industry, which outlined holistic support for
the biohealth sector from R&D to commercialization.309
Specifically, it called for collecting biodata from up to
one million Korean volunteers, which would be stored
in a new National Biological Resources Center.310 The
strategy also called for tax exemptions, loan support,
shorter review periods, and a greater than 50 percent
increase in total R&D investment in biotechnology
between 2017 and 2025.311
In November 2022, the Ministry of Science and ICT
launched the National Synthetic Biology Initiative to
boost synthetic biology and biomanufacturing through
several high-level ambitions, such as transitioning 30
percent of the country’s manufacturing industry to
biomanufacturing within a decade.312 To do this, it com-
mitted government assistance to train 1,000 synthetic
biology professionals, establish multidisciplinary depart-
ments that combine biology with AI and engineering, and
create a graduate school focused on synthetic biology,
among other measures.313
In April 2024, the Korean Presidential Advisory Council
on Science and Technology laid out a plan to make South
Korea “an advanced biotechnology powerhouse” by 2035
through a focus on “digital-bio convergence” and bioman-
ufacturing innovation.314 The comprehensive plan has
many facets, including ambitions to make South Korea
a leader in digital biotechnology—or the intersection of
data, AI, and biotechnology—and shifting the nation’s
petrochemical-based materials industry toward a biobased
industry through a national network of biofoundries.
Despite significant strengths, South Korea faces
several challenges. Like Japan, South Korea must do
more to promote a culture of entrepreneurial risk.
According to a 2019 survey by the World Economic
Forum on “Attitudes Toward Entrepreneurial Risk,”
South Korea ranked 88 out of 144.315 Another survey of
19 high-income countries ranked South Korea 17th for a
perceived lack of opportunities for starting a business.
Although the government offers generous assistance
for biotechnology start-ups, excessive paperwork can

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
@CNASDC
42
discourage firms from accessing it.316 Total start-up
financing reached $31 billion in 2021 but remains short
of total demand.317 Combined with regulatory hurdles,
Korean start-ups face difficult exit models: only 25
percent of all VC investment in Korean start-ups is
recouped through IPOs or M&As, compared to 94
percent in the United States.318 Similarly, the Korean
government provides generous funding for late-stage
technology R&D and commercialization, but its support
for early-stage research remains insufficient. Just 20
percent of government R&D funding goes to basic
research, according to a study from Korea Institute of
Science and Technology Evaluation and Planning.319
The Korean government has made a longtime bet on
its biotechnology leadership, with a long track record
of plans, investments, and initiatives to promote it. The
country has also made a strategic decision to carve out a
niche for itself on the world stage at the intersection of
biotechnology, health, AI, and digital technologies. Time
will tell if it pays off.
China: The Rising Biopower

China is racing to bypass the United States as the global
biopower, and it has the infrastructure, investment,
policies, and political will to do so. Beijing has shown
an interest in biotechnology as early as 1986, when
Chairman Deng Xiaoping first created the 863 Program
to reduce China’s foreign dependence on strategic
technologies and to bolster its indigenous technology
capabilities, including for biotechnology applications
in medicine and agriculture.320 The 863 Program
elevated biotechnology leadership as a national priority,
increased R&D funding, and began laying a foundation
of biotechnology R&D infrastructure. In recent years,
biotechnology has gained more prominence in China’s
broader push to dominate key emerging technologies.
As with several other emerging technologies, China
has nearly closed the biotech gap with the United States
since the 1980s through both licit and illicit means.
In an infamous 2013 case, U.S. authorities indicted
six Chinese nationals for conspiring to steal GM corn
varieties.321 According to a report prepared for the
U.S.-China Economic Security Review Commission
in 2019, Beijing has benefited from the relatively open
and collaborative period in U.S.-China relations in the
two decades following its accession to the World Trade
Organization, which enabled joint R&D projects, trade,
and talent exchanges.322 Over that period, Chinese firms
acquired key technologies through outright purchases,
M&A, partnerships, and forced transfers as a condition
of market entry for foreign firms. In addition, China’s
biotechnology sector has enjoyed several natural advan-
tages, including access to relatively cheap labor; a large,
growing, and increasingly skilled talent pool; and signifi-
cant expected demand from a massive domestic market.
Beyond these advantages, the country’s biotechnology
sector has benefited from ambitious long-term policies at
the central, regional, and even municipal levels. Beijing
China’s biotechnology sector has
enjoyed several natural advantages,
including access to relatively
cheap labor; a large, growing, and
increasingly skilled talent pool; and
significant expected demand from a
massive domestic market.
 ¡ Strong research and innovation base with
high domestic spending on R&D
 ¡ Growing public investment in
biotechnology R&D
 ¡ Growing biomedical production, workforce,
and exports
 ¡ Cutting-edge technology and medical
infrastructure with world-leading firms such
as Samsung BioLogics
 ¡ Forward-thinking government policies
to leverage biodata, improve financial
support, reform regulations, increase public
investment, and position the country as a
specialist in “digital-bio convergence”
 ¡ Risk-averse culture that can discourage
entrepreneurship
 ¡ Inadequate financing for biotechnology
start-ups with difficult exit models
 ¡ Insufficient support for early-stage
research
Tailwinds
Headwinds
Biopower: South Korea

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
43
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
has embraced a comprehensive, long-term strategy to
foster, protect, and mature the country’s biotechnology
sector. It has done this through several overlapping,
self-reinforcing lines of effort: boosting basic and applied
R&D, developing world-class research infrastructure,
expanding domestic biomanufacturing capabilities, and
cultivating talent.323
China has made considerable strides in becoming a
global leader in biotechnology R&D. In 2021, an index
from Nature magazine found that China hosts 8 of the
world’s 100 best life science institutes.324 However, it lags
significantly behind the United States, which has 51 such
institutes, and Europe, which has 28.325 Nevertheless,
according to the ASPI Critical Technology Tracker,
which measures a country’s technology leadership by
its share of “high-impact research,” China now leads
the world in several key biotechnologies—specifically
biofuels, synthetic biology, and biological manufac-
turing.326 It ranks second only to the United States for
vaccines and medical countermeasures.327 China’s dom-
inance is especially pronounced for synthetic biology,
in which its share of high-impact research is more than
triple that of the United States, posing a high risk of
monopolization.328 Similarly, China’s share of high-im-
pact research for biofuels is more than four times the
share of the United States.329 Chinese-affiliated scholars
also rank second globally for authoring biomedical
papers, albeit with a lower share than leading competi-
tors in top journals.330
China also enjoys a strong and growing biotechnology
innovation ecosystem and manufacturing capabilities.
As in most countries, China’s biotechnology sector has
overwhelmingly focused on medical and health appli-
cations given their large expected demand and value for
the country’s aging population.331 Favorable policies and
regulatory reforms from Beijing, a large talent pool, and
significant capital investments have also fed rapid growth
of the country’s biomedical sector in particular.332 In
recent years, China has worked hard to align with global
regulatory standards, most notably testing and approval
requirements for the FDA and European Medicines
Agency (EMA), allowing it to expand beyond its sizable
domestic market into lucrative developed economy
markets abroad.333
As in other sectors, China’s low-cost, high-quality
manufacturing has allowed it to dominate key segments
of the biomedical sector. Today, China is the largest
exporter of active pharmaceutical ingredients to the U.S.
market, and they routinely earn FDA and EMA approv-
als.334 As an example, China exports roughly 40 percent
of the world’s active pharmaceutical ingredients.335 The
country’s top CDMOs and biotechnology firms also
account for roughly 7 percent of global capacity for
monoclonal antibodies.336
Still, China’s biomedical and pharmaceutical sector
remains relatively low on the value chain and focused
principally on biologics. Contract research and manu-
facturing organizations still represent a significant share
of China’s biotechnology sector, and Chinese biomedical
firms have become global sources for biosimilars—
essentially, cheaper reproductions of original biological
drugs—even as they lag in breakthrough innovations.
However, Beijing has ambitions to move up the biologics
value chain and deliver cutting-edge breakthroughs in
areas such as gene editing through cutting-edge CAR
T and CRISPR techniques. To that end, Chinese bio-
pharmaceutical firms have accelerated innovation in
recent years.337 The government has also designated the
biopharmaceutical industry as strategically important,
creating a power signal for markets and political support
to mature the sector’s capabilities.338
Until recently, relatively unrestricted investment flows
have helped China close the biotechnology gap with the
United States. Inbound investment, largely in the form of
foreign direct investment (FDI) and VC funding, helped
nourish Chinese biotechnology firms, integrate them
into global supply chains, and transfer valuable expertise
and intellectual property.339 As Chinese biotechnology
firms matured, they began investing externally through
acquisitions, greenfield investments, and VC plays of
their own. According to a 2019 report for the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, Chinese
outbound investments in the pharmaceutical and
biotechnology sector reached $1.5 billion in 2015 and
more than doubled to $3.5 billion in 2017 .340 Chinese VC
investment in the global biotechnology industry has risen
steadily over the past decade as well, concentrating in
North America, Europe, Singapore, and Australia.
At the same time, FDI continued to pour into Chinese
biotechnology firms. According to an analysis by BCIQ,
between 2018 and 2020, VCs invested $12 billion in
Chinese biotechnology firms, triple the amount between
2015 and 2017 .341 By early 2022, only the United States
had greater market capitalization than China for bio-
technology companies launched since 2015.342 China has
also benefited from overseas training of Chinese students
and researchers, who then repatriate to China with
strong incentives from initiatives such as the Thousand
Talents Program.343 According to the Center for China
and Globalization, a Beijing-based think tank, there were
more than one million Chinese postsecondary students
abroad in 2021, making China the world’s largest source

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
@CNASDC
44
The latest Five- Year Plan also calls for “strategic
scientific plans and scientific projects” in seven fields,
three of which relate to biotechnology: brain science and
brain-inspired research, genetics, and clinical medicine
and health.353 Biotechnology is also prominently
featured in the Made in China 2025 (MIC 2025) plan,
which aims to make the country a global leader in
advanced manufacturing.354
Beyond the five-year plans, China has simultaneously
introduced a raft of specific, biotechnology-related
national strategies, including to drive medical AI devel-
opment and integrate biotechnology and AI.355 China has
boosted its biomedical sector with policies for clinical
trials, procurement rules to ensure a large domestic
market, generous R&D subsidies, export financing,
high-level diplomatic and political backing, and process
reforms such as fast-track approvals for Chinese-
developed drugs.356 Preferential tax policy for high-tech
start-ups, R&D expenses, and accelerated depreciation
for fixed assets also provide an advantage.357 Similar
regional and municipal policies complement these
advantages, while offering additional forms of support
such as subsidized certification costs, land guarantees,
and accelerated customs clearings.358
Another driver of China’s biomedical sector is a
national network of biopharmaceutical industrial parks,
supported by both central and provincial governments.359
These parks foster, accelerate, and mature domestic
biopharmaceutical capacity and development. Industrial
parks have emerged as one of Beijing’s favored means of
developing strategic sectors; by the end of 2019, China
boasted 387 such industrial zones, 193 of which focused
on the pharmaceutical sector—50 percent.360
In recent years, China has also begun to shift from
its longtime skepticism of genetically engineered (GE)
and GM agricultural products, likely due to a growing
interest in ensuring food security amid increased
geopolitical tensions.361 Historically, China has not
produced significant GM crops—except for cotton—due
to onerous regulations and limited domestic demand.
Except for cotton and papaya, Beijing has yet to approve
any GE food or feed products for domestic cultivation.362
of international students.344 Many Chinese nationals
studying in the United States are returning home—in part
due to increased opportunities in China, but also because
of growing U.S.-China tensions and the perception of a
shrinking “ceiling” for career advancement. Indeed, depar-
tures of U.S.-based Chinese scientists have increased by 75
percent since 2018, with two-thirds relocating to China.345
China has also actively supported its domestic biotalent.
As one data point, Chinese schools have dominated recent
iGEM competitions. In 2023, Chinese high schools won
42 gold medals, nearly three-fourths of all gold medals
awarded.346 U.S. high schools won three gold medals.
Chinese schools won 45 gold medals at the undergraduate
level, compared to 10 for the United States. Chinese iGEM
teams, like any team in the competition, receive support
from a range of sponsors, including government-backed
national laboratories, foundations, and R&D programs.347
Beijing’s Biotechnology Policies
Beijing has long championed the country’s biotechnology
sector through ambitious, long-term policies.
Biotechnology first featured in China’s seventh Five-
Year Plan, covering the period from 1986 to 1990, and
has gained prominence ever since.348 Beijing named
biotechnology a “strategic emerging industry” in 2013 and
again in 2020.349 China’s 13th Five- Year Plan upped the
ante, calling for transitioning China from a biotechnology
power to a biotechnology superpower.350
In an April 2022 speech, Chinese Communist Party
General Secretary Xi Jinping urged Chinese scientists
to overcome “bottlenecks” and deliver breakthroughs in
life sciences, and China’s latest State Council work report
emphasized biomanufacturing and life sciences as key
industries under China’s “new productive forces” initia-
tive to encourage new engines of economic growth and
development.351
In the latest Five- Year Plan, covering 2021–2025, Beijing
added even more policy heft with several specific ambi-
tions for its biotechnology leadership:352
 ¡ Establish a national laboratory focused on
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals
 ¡ Establish a national biological data center system
and integration of biotechnology and information
technology more broadly
 ¡ Accelerate development of bioenergy
 ¡ Develop stronger biosafety governance and risk
monitoring
 ¡ Establish an R&D risk assessment mechanism for
biotechnology
Beijing named biotechnology a
“strategic emerging industry” in
2013 and again in 2020. China’s
13th Five-Year Plan upped the ante,
calling for transitioning China
from a biotechnology power to a
biotechnology superpower.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
45
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
However, Beijing has since reformed its regulations to
lessen regulatory burdens and promote commercial
cultivation of GE crops.363 It issued its first-ever reg-
ulations for GE plants and is developing rules for GE
products more broadly, while increasing investment in
GM-related research.364
Following a similar playbook to other strategic
sectors, such as telecommunications, Beijing has also
employed concerted policies to promote and protect
select national biotechnology champions, such as BGI
Group and WuXi Biologics, creating an unfair playing
field that allows them to dominate the vast domestic
market and mature into serious global players.365 A
recent report from the Center for Security and Emerging
Technology details how Beijing has applied familiar
industrial policy to dislodge Western leadership in gene
sequencing—a foundational capability for a range of
biotechnology breakthroughs.366 Through many of the
policies described here, Beijing has cultivated BGI as the
“pointy end of the spear” for its biotechnology ambitions,
with the goal of dominating not only gene sequencing
equipment but also gene sequencing services.367 In
2010, a state development bank gave BGI $1.5 billion to
support its R&D.368
Tailwinds

Arguably, China’s biggest biotechnology advantage over
the United States is biodata. Indeed, China is poised to
become the world’s biodata leader—a position that could
confer significant advantages for its already fast-ma-
turing biomedical and biopharmaceutical sector.369 Early
on, Beijing understood the strategic value of biodata and
has proactively amassed it through domestic policy and
global harvesting using both legal and illegal means.
China sees the value of large-scale biodata in
unlocking breakthroughs for health and medicine.
Accordingly, China’s State Council views big data in
health and medicine as a national priority and has moved
to build national and regional data centers to store large-
scale health data in areas such as Fuzhou and Changzhou.
These data centers will also complement the govern-
ment’s $9.2 billion effort to boost precision medicine.370
Several domestic policies feed China’s rapid accumula-
tion of biological and genetic data. For one, the country’s
current Five- Year Plan for National Informatization
requires hospitals to use digital health records.371 Another
initiative, Healthy China 2030, calls for standardization
of biodata across data centers and promotes making
such large-scale data more accessible to researchers to
unlock new biomedical applications.372 The country’s
Biosecurity Law makes it clear that Chinese biodata
falls within the government’s sovereignty, while another
policy calls for the consolidation of national security–
relevant scientific data produced within China into
new data centers.373
China has also endured global criticism for its mass
collection of biodata—either forcibly, or without
informed consent—from residents in highly oppressed
regions such as Xinjiang and Tibet, allowing it to diver-
sify a biodataset otherwise dominated by Han Chinese.374
BGI has also come under criticism for collecting biodata
abroad through its noninvasive prenatal tests, which it
sells around the world, even as reports have surfaced
that the company has collaborated in the past with
the People’s Liberation Army and shared data from
such tests with China’s National GeneBank (CNGB),
which BGI runs.375 BGI has denied these allegations.
Today, the CNGB houses more than 10 million genetic
data samples.376
Another criticism toward China is that, while its
researchers can access the world’s biodata through open-
source datasets such as the UK Biobank and NIH’s NCBI,
this access is not reciprocal. Chinese national security
and data privacy laws directly restrict access to Chinese
genetic data without government approval.377 In other
Following a similar playbook to
other strategic sectors, such as
telecommunications, Beijing has
also employed concerted policies to
promote and protect select national
biotechnology champions, such as
BGI Group and WuXi Biologics,
creating an unfair playing field that
allows them to dominate the vast
domestic market and mature into
serious global players.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
@CNASDC
46
words, this policy imbalance benefits Chinese biotech-
nology researchers by allowing them access to far more
biodata than their U.S. counterparts. Left unaddressed,
this imbalance in data access could lead to gaps in bio-
technology capabilities down the road.378
Headwinds
Although China has considerable advantages in its
bid for biopower, it too faces headwinds. Growing
geopolitical uncertainty could mean further restrictions
on Chinese biotechnology products—including its fast-
growing biologics sector—in developed markets, stunting
its growth potential and revenue to reinvest in R&D and
stay globally competitive. Continued progress by Chinese
biomedical firms to integrate with global regulatory and
approval processes is necessary for sustained growth but
would also likely become imperiled should geopolitical
tensions intensify. Although China’s biotechnology talent
pool is growing and has made strides in attracting foreign
talent, it still struggles to compete with top destinations
for STEM talent—notably, the United States.379
Growing geopolitical tensions could also limit the
two-way capital flows that have helped mature China’s
biotechnology sector, by driving down FDI and VC
funding into China through increased risks and outright
restrictions, and by limiting the ability of Chinese firms
to make outbound investments in developed, biotechnol-
ogy-leading markets such as the United States, Europe,
and Japan. This challenge will only grow as the United
States implements the August 2023 executive order
tightening screens on outbound investment into national
security–relevant technologies.380 In a recent indica-
tion of trouble, data from ITjuzi found that financing
for pharma and biotechnology start-ups dropped by 60
percent between 2023 and 2021.381 Even more ominous,
the number of Chinese start-ups has collapsed from a
high of 51,302 in 2018 to just 1,202 in 2023.382
China’s biopharmaceutical sector may continue to lag
in clinical development due to misalignment with global
standards and regulations. For instance, to approve new
treatments, Western regulators typically require a higher
standard of data disclosure, security, and care than many
Chinese firms can meet—although they are closing the
gap. Western regulators often require data from patient
populations that demographically mirror their own,
which limits the value of relatively homogeneous China-
only clinical trials. If this trend continues, it will inhibit
innovation and impede China’s ambitions to move up the
biomedical value chain, continuing its trend of focusing
on late-stage development instead of the higher-risk,
higher-reward early-stage development. Even if China
were to boost its biomedical innovation, it still faces
challenges in building a mature, global ecosystem to com-
mercialize and scale breakthroughs, owing to challenges
with capital, talent, and access to global markets.383
Forecasting China’s Biotechnology Leadership
Despite headwinds, China’s biotechnology sector has
achieved massive growth in recent years, even if it
remains just a fraction the size of the United States’ in
terms of market capitalization.384 In 2019, for instance,
China’s biotechnology industry was just one-tenth of
the United States’ sector.385 Having matured, China’s
biomedical and biopharmaceutical sectors are now
looking beyond China to global markets and are poised
to play a significant role in the global biopharmaceutical
market.386 Although China’s biopharmaceutical sector
still has a considerable gap to close in innovative R&D,
it is making steady progress. In the past five years, total
innovative assets under clinical development in China
have tripled.387 At the same time, China is contributing
a growing share to global biomedical research, even
as it lags in top-tier publications and breakthrough
research.388 A McKinsey & Company analysis
predicts that Chinese biopharmaceutical companies
will continue to lead in “innovations in oncology,
monoclonal antibodies, and small molecules” through
2028.389 If Chinese biomedical firms can maintain price
competitiveness as they expand into new modalities,
they could secure valuable market share in emerging
economies from Latin America to Southeast Asia.390
At the same time, China will likely continue to hold
its position as a global biomedical supply hub, owing in
part to its impressive domestic manufacturing capabil-
ities for biopharmaceutical products. Beijing’s success
at amassing biological and genetic data—and the data
imbalance it has erected for foreign competitors—will
remain another powerful advantage.391
In sum, no country presents a greater challenge to
U.S. biotechnology leadership than China. The outcome
will hinge on whether the sheer brute force of China’s
Having matured, China’s biomedical
and biopharmaceutical sectors
are now looking beyond China to
global markets and are poised to
play a significant role in the global
biopharmaceutical market.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
47
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology47
policies, infrastructure buildout, talent development,
and public investment will overcome longtime short-
comings in cutting-edge research, innovation, and
commercialization, as well as new challenges from rising
geopolitical tensions, falling biotechnology investment,
and a faltering ecosystem for technology start-ups. Just
as important, the outcome will depend on whether U.S.
policymakers coast on the nation’s current leadership or
take action to secure it for a generation.
 ¡ Several long-term biotechnology-related
national strategies, including a strategy to
integrate biotechnology and AI
 ¡ Preferential tax, land, and other policies
for biotechnology, along with generous
R&D subsidies, export financing, high-
level diplomatic and political backing, and
fast-track approvals for Chinese-developed
drugs
 ¡ Large-scale, accessible biodata amassed
through licit and illicit means
 ¡ Rapidly growing biomedical and
biopharmaceutical sectors
 ¡ Expanding share of global biomedical
research
 ¡ Status as a global biomedical supply hub
due to robust domestic manufacturing
 ¡ National network of biopharmaceutical
parks
 ¡ Biopharmaceutical sector that trails in
innovative R&D
 ¡ Lags in top-tier biomedical publications
and breakthrough research
 ¡ Rising geopolitical tensions that
could impede inbound capital, slow
the maturation of the biotechnology
ecosystem, and stifle expansion in
developed markets
 ¡ Collapsing biotechnology and pharma
investment and rate of technology start-
ups
Tailwinds
Headwinds
The Rising Biopower: China

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
@CNASDC
48
 Recommendations
Chapter 05
T
he question in the coming years is whether
policymakers and industry play America’s hand
wisely or surrender its leadership to China
and other foreign competitors, with potentially grave
costs to U.S. national security and economic interests.
Although the Biden administration has made notable
progress in elevating biotechnology as a strategic priority
and begun construction of a policy framework with its
biotechnology EO, significant work remains. Securing
America’s position as the global biopower requires that
policymakers act now to accelerate the country’s natural
headwinds, including an unrivaled capital market to
seed and scale biotechnology firms and applications; an
unmatched ability to generate and attract top biotalent;
and an unprecedented global network of partners and
allies bound by shared democratic values. At the same
time, policymakers must navigate growing headwinds
that could stall progress. These include a still-immature
policy framework; nonexistent or needlessly complex
federal definitions, standards, and regulations; inad-
equate, imbalanced, and poorly coordinated public
investment, combined with private investment that over-
whelmingly focuses on biopharmaceutical applications
at the expense of other sectors; uncertainty over how
best to unleash the nation’s biodata while ensuring
respect for privacy and civil liberties; and enduring
public skepticism over biotechnology applications in
ethically fraught areas such as gene editing.
This section outlines several immediate and longer-term
recommendations for leaders in policymaking and
industry in six key areas:
 ¡ Invest in research and infrastructure
 ¡ Expand biotalent
 ¡ Unlock biodata
 ¡ Strengthen and streamline policy
 ¡ Lead globally
 ¡ Build public trust
The recommendations below would require roughly
$20 billion in new federal investment to help secure
American biopower for a generation. Policymakers
should view that funding level as the floor. A more
detailed breakdown of this $20 billion investment can be
found in the appendix.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
49
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology

Invest in Research
and Infrastructure

No country matches America’s combined public and
private investment in biotechnology. However, public
investments diffuse across multiple agencies and
programs, limiting their impact and accessibility. Public
investment in life sciences R&D flows overwhelmingly
through NSF and NIH, mostly supporting health and
medical sectors and dwarfing initiatives to support
the broader bioeconomy such as BioMADE, T-BRSC,
DBMIP , and ARS. Taken together, federal investments
fall short of the levels required to close gaps with China
in key fields, specifically synthetic biology and biological
manufacturing, genomes and genetic sequencing and
analysis, and novel antibiotics and antivirals.392 In
addition, public investments remain inadequate to build
a robust domestic bioindustrial base, which is virtually
nonexistent today.
The United States leads the world in private invest-
ment in biotechnology, but investments remain
overwhelmingly concentrated in the biomedical and
biopharmaceutical sectors. This leaves many ventures
in broader biotechnology applications for defense, agri-
culture, energy, and manufacturing starved of capital and
infrastructure. This dynamic has left other promising
biotechnology applications undercapitalized, under-
developed, and vulnerable as firms cross the Valley of
Death—the perilous time when their initial funding runs
low, and they require more capital to scale and survive.
Many private investors recognize the potential of broader
biotechnology applications but view their returns as more
distant and uncertain. Policy can incentivize private capital
in broader biotechnology applications through direct
public investment, increased demand through stronger
biobased procurement policy, and other incentives such as
preferential tax treatment and loan guarantees.

Specifically, policymakers should adopt the following
recommendations.
Expand infrastructure to seed, support,
and scale biotechnology ventures across the
Valley of Death
Congress should create incentives to attract
private investments to national security–relevant
biotechnologies. For instance, Congress should
strengthen the R&D tax credit for key national security–
relevant technologies, including biotechnology, and
consider deductions for accelerated depreciation of R&D
expenses. In both cases, Congress could limit these tax
benefits to early-stage biotechnology firms to limit costs.
Congress should protect and ideally extend the Qualified
Advanced Energy Project Credit, which provides a 30
percent tax credit for many bioenergy and bioindustrial
projects.393 Finally, Congress should examine the UK’s
Long-Term Investment for Technology and Science
initiative, which has provided up to $320 million in
government support to create mechanisms for large
institutional investors, such as universities and pension
funds, to invest in science and technology firms.394
Boost demand for biobased products by
further leveraging federal purchasing power
The U.S. government should flex its purchasing power
to increase long-term demand for biobased products,
spurring innovation and fortifying the biotechnology
ecosystem during economic downturns—especially in
sectors beyond health and medicine. Today, the USDA
leads the BioPreferred Program, which requires that the
federal government and its contractors give purchasing
preference to biobased products for certain categories
of products, with some exemptions.395 Currently, the
USDA has designated 139 categories, ranging from paints
to household cleaners, under the program.396 For all
undesignated categories, the federal government must
give purchasing preference to products that contain at
least 25 percent biobased content, with some reasonable
exceptions. To boost demand for biobased products, the
USDA should expand the list of designated products for
the BioPreferred Program beyond the current total of
139. For all undesignated products, they should explore
the feasibility of raising the minimum threshold from 25
percent to 50 percent over time. It should also partner
with the General Services Administration to expand
training for federal procurement officers to better
understand the BioPreferred requirements and explore
reforms to facilitate BioPreferred-compliant purchases. In
addition, the new administration should direct the DoD to
develop a plan to leverage its procurement power to boost

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
@CNASDC
50
demand for biomanufactured products and materials and
explore synergies with investments from T-BRSC, DBMIP ,
and the Office of Strategic Capital (OSC).
Direct BioMADE to allocate existing funds
before it receives more
BioMADE is an independent, nonprofit membership
body that seeks to foster a “sustainable, domestic end-
to-end bioindustrial manufacturing ecosystem.”397 As of
April 2024, BioMADE had only announced $165 million
in funded projects—just 36 percent of its $450 million
budget from the DoD.398 Conceptually, BioMADE holds
great promise. Before Congress scales funding to the
organization, however, BioMADE must prove that it can
effectively allocate existing resources. The next adminis-
tration should also clarify eligibility for project funding,
including greenfield projects. According to the authors’
interviews with U.S. government personnel, ambiguity
over project eligibility has delayed new funding awards.
Make biotechnology projects eligible for
FAST-41 expedited federal environmental
review and permitting
To expedite construction of biofoundries and other bio-
technology-related infrastructure, Congress should make
federally supported biotechnology projects eligible for
the FAST-41 program, which currently considers expe-
dited federal environmental review and permitting for 18
sectors, including AI, data storage and data management,
cybersecurity, and quantum information sciences and
technology—but not biotechnology. Given the relatively
lower cost of biofoundries, Congress should consider
reforms to include projects with total investment less
than $200 million, the current threshold for FAST-41
eligibility.399
Unleash the DOE’s data, computing, and
research infrastructure for biotechnology
The DOE played a leading role in the Human Genome
Project alongside NIH and boasts formidable, if largely
untapped, resources for biotechnology. The DOE is the
top generator of classified and unclassified scientific
data. It boasts the world’s largest collection of advanced
experimental facilities, including specialized facili-
ties for genomics. It hosts the Advanced Biofuels and
Bioproducts Process Development Unit at the Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory.400 It has the world’s
“fastest, most powerful, and highly energy efficient”
supercomputers, with open access to the scientific
community. Together with its national labs, the DOE
has a network of more than 40,000 scientists, including
“chemists, biologists, materials scientists, and computer
scientists.”401 In July 2024, the DOE announced a major
new initiative, the Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence
Science, Security and Technology (FASST) initiative,
which aims to “build the world’s most powerful inte-
grated scientific AI systems” with a focus on data,
computing infrastructure, applications, and model
security and trustworthiness.402 The next administration
should direct the DOE’s Office of Critical and Emerging
Technologies to develop a department-wide strategy for
leveraging its diverse resources for biotechnology, from
expanding support for workforce development, testbeds,
and commercial partnerships, to opening computing
and user facilities to vetted biotechnology researchers
and ventures, to making the AI-biotechnology nexus a
priority of the FASST initiative. The strategy should also
identify funding and policy gaps.
Build a national biofoundry network
A robust network of regional biofoundries would allow
researchers and industry to access advanced tools for
bioengineering and biomanufacturing, driving cross-
sector collaboration and innovation. To build this
network, policymakers should significantly expand NSF’s
BioFoundries program, which supports the construction
of integrated facilities that combine biological disci-
plines with automation, AI, and advanced computing to
drive biotechnology innovation.403 In August 2024, NSF
announced awards totaling $75 million to help establish
five biofoundries across the country. Congress should
double NSF’s available funding for this effort, allowing
NSF to make at least $150 million in awards annually to
seed 100 biofoundries nationwide over the next decade.
Scale the DoD’s efforts to boost the
defense bioindustrial base to $6.35 billion
As part of the Biotechnology EO, the DoD committed
$1 billion for the DBIMP and $270 million for T-BRSC
over a five-year period from FY2022 to FY2026. T-BRSC
is run by a program element in the U.S. Army and helps
translate defense-relevant biotechnology research into
products and to shore up defense supply chains by sup-
porting the development of biobased materials. DBIMP
has an overlapping but broader mandate and focuses on
scaling defense-relevant biotechnology manufacturing
capabilities after they have demonstrated value. The

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
51
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
next administration should better focus, coordinate, and
elevate these efforts to ensure continued support for
defense-relevant biotechnology products from research
to prototyping to development to production, leveraging
DARPA’s Biological Technologies Office and the DoD’s
new OSC, which combines public and private investment
to fortify defense-critical technology supply chains.
Biotechnology is one of the OSC’s 14 critical technology
areas.404 Congress should double the DoD’s total current
spending of $1.27 billion over five years, provided
T-BRSC and DBIMP spend existing funds strategically.
As of September 2024, DBIMP had announced 25 awards
totaling $42 million.405
Increase funding for DARPA’s Biological
Technologies Office
The administration’s FY2025 budget request for DARPA
is $4.37 billion, an increase of $247 million from the
FY2024 enacted level.406 Congress should specifically
increase funding for the BTO to support truly “high-risk/
high-reward” breakthrough biotechnologies that support
DoD operations and boost warfighter readiness.
Scale the Advanced Research Projects Agency
for Health’s funding to at least $3 billion for
FY2025, double the previously enacted level
of $1.5 billion
The Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health
(ARPA-H), is a new independent body housed within
NIH focused on high-potential, high-impact biomed-
ical and health research.407 Most ARPA-H lines of effort
involve biotechnology, including programs to drive
breakthroughs in printing human organs, self-healing
joints, engineering immune cells in the human body,
precision cancer therapy, and early cancer detection.408
Increased funding would supercharge these efforts with
significant potential benefits to U.S. leadership in bio-
medical innovation.
Allocate $50 million annually through
America’s Seed Fund for biotechnology
NSF leads the Seed Fund, which awards more than $200
million a year in R&D funding to roughly 400 technolo-
gy-focused start-ups nationwide with “founder-friendly
terms” but is routinely oversubscribed.409 Under the NSF
program, technology-focused start-ups with the poten-
tial for significant positive social impact are awarded up
to $2 million—including up to $305,000 in nondilutive
funding for R&D and prototyping.410 The Seed Fund
offers support for up to 18 months to help firms develop
their prototypes and proof-of-concepts, followed by up
to two years of support to enable technology transfer and
commercialization.411
To catalyze America’s biotechnology start-ups,
Congress should authorize at least $50 million in new
resources for the Seed Fund to support biotechnology
ventures for the next decade. Whereas broader NSF
funding tends to support general biotechnology-related
R&D at universities, America’s Seed Fund ventures can
help derisk private capital by signaling confidence in the
venture and demand for its products.
Fund NSF’s FY2025 budget request of
$10.18 billion and meet its biotechnology
budget request of $421 million412
Currently, NSF invests around $250 million annually
to support U.S. biotechnology and the bioeconomy.413
This funding supports biotechnology-relevant research
grants in areas ranging from the molecular foundations
of biology to plant genomes, synthetic cell design, and
biomechanical engineering.414 These grants largely flow
to universities to support general and applied research
related to biotechnology. The 2022 CHIPS and Science
Act doubled NSF’s total authorized funding to $81 billion
over five years from 2023 to 2027 .415 However, Congress
has yet to obligate the total amount, leaving NSF’s budget
short $8.5 billion in FY2023 and $2.4 billion in FY2024.416
In its proposed FY2025 budget, NSF requested $10.18
billion total, including $421.18 million for biotechnol-
ogy.417 Congress should view the $421.18 million as the
floor, not the ceiling, and ensure sustained funding at this
level or higher in the years to come. This funding would
accelerate NSF-supported biotechnology general and
applied research, workforce training, and partnerships
with the private sector to drive technology transfer and
commercialization. It should also continue and expand
the $28 million for NSF’s Future Manufacturing initia-
tive, which provides grants of up to $3 million in seed and
research funds for biomanufacturing.418 At the same time,
Congress should direct NSF to develop a plan within a
year to better consolidate and coordinate biotechnology
investments across its directorates.
Fund biotechnology moonshots and Bold Goals
The 2023 Bold Goals identified five priorities for an
ambitious, 20-year biotechnology research agenda.419
These spanned from the DOE’s goal to demonstrate and

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
@CNASDC
52
requested level funding of $280 million for its Bioenergy
Technologies Office, which supports research to convert
domestic biomass into biofuels and bioproducts.425
Fund NIST’s FY2025 budget request to
accelerate development of biotechnology
standards and measures
NIST plays a leading role in development biotechnology
measurements and standards, which are foundational
to biotechnology research and policy. However, years
of inadequate funding has left it with dilapidated
facilities and antiquated information technology (IT)
infrastructure. A 2023 NASEM report found that NIST’s
outdated infrastructure seriously impeded its ability to
execute on its core mission, including an “inability to
perform critical measurements in biotechnology.”426 At
a minimum, Congress should meet NIST’s request for
an additional $311.5 million for FY2025 to modernize
its infrastructure and support biotechnology-relevant
initiatives such as the National Institute for Innovation
in Manufacturing and Biopharmaceuticals (NIIMBL).

Expand American Biotalent

American biopower hinges on access to world-class
biotalent in industry, academia, and government. As
with most critical technologies, the United States faces
a shortage of biotalent at every level, hindering the
sector’s innovation and development. Given the cross-
cutting nature of biotechnology, there is no silver bullet
for the talent shortage. Policymakers and industry must
convince more students and workers to pursue STEM
careers generally, attract those already in STEM tracks to
consider biotechnology careers specifically, and broaden
pathways into the bioeconomy for those not in STEM
careers.
In June 2023, the Biden administration released a plan
to expand and diversify America’s biotechnology and
biomanufacturing workforce, which outlined several ini-
tiatives such as prioritizing biomanufacturing in federal
support for apprenticeships at the Department of Labor
and expanding partnerships with historically Black
colleges and universities, tribal colleges and universities,
deploy biobased alternatives that could replace more
than 90 percent of existing plastics and other commer-
cial polymers to the USDA’s goal of reducing agricultural
methane emissions to help reduce U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions by 50 percent.420
The Bold Goals seek to galvanize public, private, and
academic investment and collaboration, but they did
not include any new funding or agency commitments
to prioritize existing funds. The five lead agencies
should identify the funding required to progress rapidly
toward their Bold Goals. At a minimum, Congress can
meet the DOE’s budget request for $36.54 million in
new funding for biological and environmental research,
along with a $95 million increase for manufacturing and
energy supply chains. To boost federal biotechnology
research across government to support the Bold Goals,
Congress should fund the $50 million appropriated to
the Agriculture Advanced Research and Development
Authority (AgARDA) and increase funding for the
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development
Authority (BARDA) by $20 million over FY2023 levels.421
At the same time, Congress could task and fund agencies
to pursue additional biotechnology moonshots, from arti-
ficial photosynthesis and fuel cells to universal vaccines
to biobased carbon capture.
Fund NIH’s FY2025 budget request and
specify biotechnology priorities

In the most recent fiscal year, Congress reduced NIH’s
budget by $368 million, the agency’s first such reduc-
tion in a decade.422 In its FY2025 budget, NIH requested
$50.2 billion, a $2.4 billion increase over the prior fiscal
year.423 Congress should match this request and restore
FY2023 funding levels to the NIH Innovation Account to
back several biotechnology-relevant goals from precision
medicine to neurotechnologies from its FY2023 level of
$1.085 billion.424 In addition, Congress should also push
NIH to provide funds beyond disease-specific research
to include platform technology development, while
specifying funds to renovate and build nonfederal bio-
technology research facilities and boost relevant centers
such as the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, whose funding has remained virtually
flat for years.
Fund the DOE’s FY2025 budget request for bio-
technology-related priorities. The DOE has requested
$5 million in additional funding for its new Office of
Critical and Emerging Technologies, which is charged
with coordinating diffuse biotechnology investments
across the DOE, among other roles. The DOE has also

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
53
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
and minority serving institutions.427 Realizing the full
potential of American biopower, however, requires
more ambitious steps to build, attract, and retain
biotalent.
Supercharge America’s biotalent with
high-skilled immigration reform
Immigration is one of America’s enduring compet-
itive advantages. Global STEM talent wants to study,
work, and live in the United States. Political gridlock
over comprehensive immigration reform should not
impede progress on more targeted, high-skilled immi-
gration reform, given the stakes for U.S. national and
economic security. Specifically, Congress should exempt
immigrants with STEM PhDs from annual green card
caps, dramatically raise the cap on H1-B visas for STEM
workers, fund federal immigration agents to clear the
visa backlog, and consider eliminating the per-country
visa quotas entirely.428 Narrower proposals could include
reciprocal, expedited student and work visas for high-
tech researchers and entrepreneurs in key national
security–relevant fields, including biotechnology, across
members of NATO, AUKUS, the Quad, and the Five Eyes
alliance.
Industry should expand biotechnology
exposure and opportunities in secondary
schools
Biotechnology companies and industry associations
should proactively engage middle schools and high
schools to expose students to exciting biotechnology
applications to build interest at an early stage. Firms
should also partner with local school districts to
create extracurricular activities, internships, and even
apprenticeship programs. Beyond this, they could offer
guidance on key skills and competencies for students to
secure biotechnology careers.
Support greater U.S. participation in
biotechnology competitions like iGEM
Industry should partner with secondary and postsec-
ondary schools to create and support teams to compete
in the annual iGEM competition to build excitement
for synthetic biology among students as they consider
careers, especially in historically underrepresented
communities and geographies. Local, state, and federal
governments should explore mechanisms to provide
financial support.
Expand federal initiatives that support
biotechnology workforce development
Congress should increase funding for federal initiatives
that build domestic biotalent. This includes ensuring
robust and sustained funding for NSF, whose grant
programs ensure regular funding for biotechnology
researchers. Beyond this, NSF has several specific initia-
tives worth supporting, including:
 ¡ The Advanced Technological Education program,
which encourages partnerships between secondary
and postsecondary education institutions, industry,
and state economic development agencies to better
educate science and engineering technicians through
curriculum development, expanded career pathways,
and professional development for secondary and post-
secondary faculty.429
 ¡ The Experiential Learning for Emerging and Novel
Technologies initiative, which promotes partnerships
between companies in key emerging technologies,
including biotechnology, and workforce development
organizations to expand opportunities for people to
gain hands-on skills and experiences.430
 ¡ The Graduate Research Fellowship Program, NSF’s
flagship grant that provides a three-year annual
stipend of $37 ,000, along with $16,000 for tuition and
fees, to outstanding students pursuing STEM masters
or doctoral graduate degrees at accredited U.S. insti-
tutions.431 Current funding only allows for about 2,300
fellowships per fiscal year and is routinely oversub-
scribed; Congress should double NSF funding to allow
roughly 4,500 fellowships annually while specifying
that at least 1,000 should focus on biotechnology-re-
lated fields.432
The Department of Commerce, through NIST, funds
NIIMBL. Among other goals, this program expands
pathways for students from nontraditional backgrounds
in careers in biopharmaceutical manufacturing through
an intensive, weeklong immersion program.433 Since its
launch in 2019, NIIMBL has served 80 students, with
many securing jobs at top biopharmaceutical firms.434
In 2024, the initiative announced its largest cohort yet
of 63 students, suggesting considerable opportunity for
expansion.435
For its part, NIH has several initiatives to expand
the biotechnology workforce, with a focus on bio-
medical research. Its Undergraduate Scholarship
Program provides up to $20,000 per year of support to

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
@CNASDC
54
undergraduates interested in fields related to biomedi-
cine, and the Student Intramural Research and Training
Award provides stipends to high school, college, and
graduate students interested in biomedical research
careers.436
Broaden biotalent across the federal
government
Like AI, biotechnology’s cross-cutting applications
require bioliteracy across the federal government. From
program managers to procurement officers, intelligence
officers, and foreign service officers, effective bio-
technology policy will demand far greater biotalent in
government. The White House should take several steps,
many modeled on the October 2023 AI executive order,
to incentivize, expand, and accelerate biotechnology
hiring across government, as follows:437
 ¡ Create a Biotechnology Talent Task Force under the
newly launched National Bioeconomy Board to identify
key mission areas and priority competencies for federal
biotalent; develop a plan for the rapid recruitment of
biotalent in government; track and expedite the hiring of
biotechnology talent across the federal government; and
identify and disseminate best practices to hire, retrain,
and retain biotechnology talent.
 ¡ Coordinate agency technology talent programs and
fellowship programs, including those described above
at NSF and NIH, to maximize federal incentives to
expand the biotalent pipeline, with a focus on incentiv-
izing careers beyond traditional biomedical fields.
 ¡ Streamline personnel vetting requirements and
expedite security clearance reviews, as appropriate, for
mission-critical biotechnology positions.
 ¡ Consider government-wide direct-hire authority and
excepted service appointments, including Schedule
A(r) hiring authorities.
 ¡ Require relevant agencies to develop internal programs
to start familiarizing staff with biotechnology, with
opportunities for more advanced training as required
by the position.
 ¡ Leverage initiatives such as the Presidential Innovation
Fellowship and U.S. Digital Service to emphasize can-
didates with backgrounds in biotechnology.

Unlock Biodata

Biotech leadership hinges on quality biodata. However,
the proliferation of biodata in the United States has not
been matched by sufficient public and private efforts
to clean, coordinate, and analyze them. Tapping into
America’s biological “big data”—while protecting
privacy, security, and public trust—is essential to U.S.
biotechnology leadership.
Fully fund the All of Us Research Program,
which faced a 34 percent funding cut in
FY2024 compared to the previous year
Congress should match NIH’s $541 million request for
FY2025 for this project. Strong, long-term funding will
ensure not only project completion but also the nec-
essary computing and cybersecurity infrastructure to
house, protect, and analyze large-scale data.
Create a secure American Biobank
Biodata has increasingly become a strategic national
asset, but it remains fragmented across thousands of
public and private entities and is difficult for researchers
and developers alike to access. As such, Congress should
authorize creation of an American Biobank, modeled
on the UK Biobank and structured as an independent
nonprofit.438 The American Biobank would be fed
initially by government-supported initiatives such
as the National Agricultural Library, NIH’s All of Us
Research Program, and the NCBI, but it would also
have the authority to acquire or purchase biodata from
other public and private sources that include not only
health, but also energy, environmental, and agricultural
data. The American Biobank would strive to become
the preeminent national repository of biodata. It would
serve as a one-stop shop for accredited researchers and
small businesses to access both large-scale biological
and genetic data in a secure and trusted environment,
along with advanced computing power for machine
learning analysis. By consolidating significant biodata
under a single institution with common, high standards
for governance, access, and use rules, a national biobank
would help turbocharge U.S. biotechnology research and

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
55
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
innovation while ensuring high standards for privacy and
cybersecurity. The UK Biobank began with initial core
funding of about $234 million, derived from both public
and private sources.439 Congress should provide roughly
half this amount to attract private capital to secure the
rest. The envisioned concentration of valuable biological
data will of course require an accompanying emphasis
on cybersecurity as well as secure access for vetted
researchers and ventures.
Alternatively, federal agencies such as HHS can
support state governments to create regional biobanks
modeled on the success of the Indiana Health
Information Exchange, which is currently the “the
nation’s largest inter-organizational clinical data
repository.”440
Clarify and modernize regulations for the use
of health and genomic data for biotechnology
research
Ambiguity over several existing laws and regulations,
namely HIPAA, needlessly hinders biotechnology
research. It also encourages data hoarding instead of
responsible data sharing. HHS should engage with
genomic scientists and issue clear and consistent
guidance for how HIPAA’s minimum necessary standard
applies to the use of genomic data in certain research
activities.441 This would remove uncertainty, spurring
innovation while ensuring compliance with the flagship
privacy rule.442 At the same time, Congress should
modernize laws governing personal medical data to
unlock the power of deidentified patient data, which
offer benefits for biomedical and genomic research with
lower risks to privacy and civil rights.443 Reforms should
clarify ownership of deidentified patient data and estab-
lish incentives, such as a compensation scheme, for the
responsible sharing of deidentified biodata.444 However,
continued advances in machine learning tools will make
it easier to reassociate certain data with individuals,
requiring strong, enforceable, and regularly updated
technical standards to ensure robust deidentification.445
Invest in privacy-preserving and privacy-
enhancing technologies and incentivize adoption
by biotechnology researchers and health
providers
Privacy-enhancing and privacy-preserving technologies,
such as differential privacy, homomorphic encryption,
and synthetic data, remain in their early stages but
offer a promising route for democratic societies to avail
themselves of large-scale biodata without surrendering
a commitment to privacy. These techniques remain in
varying stages of development, and some—such as homo-
morphic encryption and synthetic data—will require
significant time and investment before they are cost-ef-
fective at scale.446 In March 2023, the National Science
and Technology Council released a National Strategy to
Advance Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing and Analytics
(PPDSA), which outlines several worthy recommen-
dations to accelerate the development and adoption of
such technologies.447 These include, among many steps,
accelerating R&D for current and emerging PPDSA tech-
nologies, creating pilot projects for implementing these
technologies within the federal government, and estab-
lishing technical standards, standardized taxonomies,
and testbeds. The administration should actively imple-
ment the strategy, and Congress should ensure adequate
oversight and resources.
Pursue an all-out effort to make federal
biodata AI ready
The federal government has amassed significant biodata
housed principally within HHS, NIH, the EPA, and
the USDA. However, existing data is often incomplete,
inconsistent, outdated, and unstandardized—even within
agencies. Significant work remains to clean, curate, and
structure the data to prepare it for analysis by advanced
machine learning tools. The White House should require
select federal agencies to audit their biotechnology-rel-
evant data and require an intensive effort to make it AI
ready. At the same time, the White House should develop
improved standards to ensure future biotechnology-rele-
vant data collection is compatible with machine learning
tools for analysis.
Strengthen cybersecurity at hospitals, clinics,
and other biodata repositories
As biological and genetic data assume greater strategic
importance, so will ensuring that data remains secure
from growing cyber threats. Recent years have brought a
rise in ransomware and other cyberattacks against major
hospital systems, which often lag in adopting cyberse-
curity best practices and the latest defensive tools.448
According to HHS, there has been a 93 percent increase
in cyber breaches reported to its Office for Civil Rights
between 2018 and 2022, with a 278 percent increase
in large breaches that involve ransomware.449 In July
2024, a major ransomware attack targeted OneBlood, a
blood donation nonprofit, delaying procedures across

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
@CNASDC
56
some 300 of its hospital partners.450 Last December,
HHS released a cybersecurity strategy for the health
sector.451 To help HHS implement the strategy,
Congress should provide new funding and authorities
for HHS and expand financial and technical assistance
programs for U.S. hospitals and clinics, including
through its Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP)
program. At a minimum, Congress can provide the $12
million increase to the CIP that HHS requested for
FY2025.
Develop a standardized framework for secure
and trusted biodata environments for research
To access secure environments to analyze large-scale,
diverse biodata, U.S.-based biotechnology researchers
have only a fragmented landscape across government,
academic, and private platforms—each with their
own access rules, structure, governance, and security
practices. The lack of a high, common standard across
secure data environments can undermine collabo-
ration, raise costs for researchers to access multiple
datasets, and erode public trust. Instead, policymakers
should look to the UK’s standardized network of secure
data environments, created with an initial investment
of nearly $260 million, which allow vetted researchers
to analyze sensitive health and genetic data in a secure,
privacy-respecting manner.452 HHS should conduct a
feasibility study for modeling a similar approach in the
United States, which has the potential to create a more
unified, consistent, and trustworthy network of large-
scale biodatabases.
Accelerate the transition toward a more
unified, interoperable system for EHRs and
electronic medical records
The archipelago of health providers and lack of con-
sistent, enforceable standards for health and medical
data collection has left the United States with a widely
fragmented biodata landscape, impeding the nation’s
ability to unlock insights from large-scale biodata with
advanced machine learning tools. Although the country
has made progress toward a more interoperable,
standardized ecosystem for biodata—thanks largely to
reforms in the 21st Century Cures Act—significant gaps
remain. Without reforms to promote EHR standard-
ization, sharing, and interoperability, newly collected
biodata will remain largely inaccessible to researchers
and developers. One promising initiative is the Trusted
Exchange Framework and Common Agreement,
which fosters biodata exchanges through a nationwide
network.453 HHS should strengthen the effort by moving
from a voluntary to a mandatory participation model
for all health providers, expanding its current technical
focus on data exchange to include data standardization.

Strengthen and Streamline
Biotechnology Policy
As with AI, America must pursue policies that enable
cutting-edge bio-innovation, while maintaining safety
and security. Biotechnology regulations, to the extent
they exist, are outdated, incoherent, and insufficient to
provide the stable regulatory framework required for
private sector innovation.
With that said, the United States is relatively ahead of
some competitors in articulating national priorities and
plans for biotechnology and the broader bioeconomy,
exemplified by the 2022 Biotechnology EO, the Bold
Goals, and a flurry of agency-level initiatives. With that
said, the United States still lacks significant biotechnol-
ogy-related legislation to codify a stable and sufficiently
resourced national strategy to unlock the full poten-
tial of biotechnology. Executive orders do not always
survive changing administrations, and even when they
do, they are not always prioritized for implementation
by successors.
Develop a unified national strategy for
American biopower
Despite the flurry of efforts across the administration,
the U.S. government still lacks a detailed, long-term
strategy to secure America’s place as the preeminent
biopower. The 2022 Biotechnology EO remains the
closest document to such a strategy. However, it does
not set out long-term goals for U.S. biotechnology
leadership or identify gaps and synergies across sectors
or the civilian and military domains, nor does it include
detailed, multiyear plans for implementation and
estimated funding needs. Competitors abroad have had
detailed biotechnology strategies for years; the next
administration should direct the interagency to finally
develop a strategy for America.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
57
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Strengthen the biotechnology policy
architecture across the government
The March 2024 launch of the National Bioeconomy
Board was an important and overdue step to elevating
biotechnology and improving coordination across the
federal government.454 The next administration should
continue this effort and consider elevating it with the
deputy White House chief of staff as chair. Once the
administration develops a unified national strategy
for American biopower, it should task relevant federal
agencies with developing detailed implementation strat-
egies to support its goals through their various policies,
programs, investments, and outreach, while identifying
agency gaps in resources and authorities for the White
House and Congress to review. Relevant agencies should
also consider designating a permanent chief biotech-
nology officer, analogous to the chief AI officer required
by the October 2023 executive order on artificial
intelligence, with a direct reporting line to at least the
undersecretary level.455
Update NAICS and NAPCS codes for
biotechnologies and the bioeconomy during
the 2027 revision process
The 2022 Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology
tasked the DOC with recommending revisions to
the NAICS and NAPCS codes ahead of the next five-
year review process in 2027 . These two federal codes
track economic activity across different sectors and
products, allowing for consistent measurement across
the economy. However, this existing framework focuses
on specific sectors and final products, whereas the
bioeconomy cuts across multiple sectors and hinges
more on the techniques used to create a product, rather
than the product itself. As NAICS prepares its 2027
update, it should adopt recommendations from the
Interagency Technical Working Group submitted in
its September 2023 report.456 The next administration
should then direct federal agencies to adopt the codes
in its work products to ensure consistent analysis across
government.
Develop a uniform federal definition for
biotechnology and the bioeconomy
Today, different federal agencies maintain defini-
tions of biotechnology and the bioeconomy relevant
to their particular jurisdictions.457 Beyond this, recent
years have seen multiple definitions put forward for
the bioeconomy, from the 2020 National Academies
report on Safeguarding the Bioeconomy to the 2022
Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology to the
2022 Bioeconomy Lexicon.458 Although each defi-
nition captures important nuances, the variance on
balance impedes federal coordination, measurement,
and policy. It also creates an additional burden for
researchers and the private sector—especially smaller
biotechnology ventures. Congress should task NIST
with developing and proposing uniform federal defini-
tions for biotechnology and the bioeconomy, drawing
on the recent lexicon and in coordination with the 2027
NAICS and NAPCS review process.
Establish a single federal office to consolidate
biotechnology regulation for nondefense
applications
Since 1986, the federal government has sought to
streamline biotechnology regulation through the
Coordinated Framework. Successive administrations
have made incremental progress in increasing the
clarity, transparency, and efficiency of the framework
that is now divided between the USDA, FDA, and EPA.
In May 2024, the three agencies published a detailed
plan to further improve the Coordinated Framework
in response to the 2022 Executive Order on Advancing
Biotechnology.459 The plan included many worthy and
overdue reforms, such as the USDA’s commitment
to streamline permit applications and clarify which
modified microorganisms are exempt from regulation,
and the FDA’s pledge to issue clear guidance on its over-
sight of gene editing products.460
Nevertheless, as long as biotechnology regulation
remains divided across three large federal agencies,
each with their own culture, processes, rules, stan-
dards, and bureaucratic interests, it will create needless
ambiguity, redundancy, and regulatory burden on
biotechnology developers. For years, biotechnology
stakeholders have consistently complained that the
three agencies often have different definitions, data
requirements, and review timelines.461 As biotech-
nologies rapidly evolve, it is fair to wonder whether
the three leading agencies can proactively update the
Coordinated Framework to keep pace.
Alternatively, Congress could replace the
Coordinated Framework with a consolidated regula-
tory office that draws on staff from the three agencies,
in addition to outside experts, that can provide a single
point of entry for regulation for developers, along with
harmonized regulatory definitions, policies, processes,
and data requirements, and dedicated staff able to
respond promptly and comprehensively.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
@CNASDC
58

Lead Globally

Although the United States must initially focus on
shoring up its domestic biotechnology ecosystem, its
long-term leadership will grow or falter in part based
on global engagement to shape norms, secure overseas
markets, and spearhead the development of a still-
forming international biotechnology architecture.
Fortunately, the United States enters the biorevolution
with an extraordinary advantage: an unrivaled global
network of allies and partners with considerable
strengths in biotechnology and biomanufacturing.
European allies such as France, the United Kingdom,
Japan, and South Korea are all competitive across a
range of biotechnologies, including synthetic biology and
genetic engineering. India ranks third after China and the
United States in both biological manufacturing and novel
antibiotics and antivirals.462 More ambitious partnerships
could promote greater cooperation around biotalent, joint
R&D projects, information sharing on emerging biotech
capabilities and supply chains, and efforts to shape norms
and standards in line with democratic values.463
The United States should fully exercise its global
leadership, and it has little time to waste. As with AI,
Washington’s decisions in the next few years could deter-
mine whether the future of biotechnology will be defined
by democratic nations and values, or by an emerging
techno-authoritarianism. The stakes are a future of
responsibly developed and deployed biotechnologies
that unlock positive breakthroughs for human health,
energy, agriculture, and defense, or a dystopian world
of nonconsensual biosurveillance, reckless bioweapon
development, and a frightening race to gain geostrategic
advantage through population-wide genetic modifica-
tions and human-computer integration.
Convene a global Biotechnology Safety and
Opportunity Summit. Modeled after the success of the
UK’s 2023 Bletchley AI Safety Summit, the United States
should convene a Biotechnology Safety and Opportunity
Summit to reinforce its global leadership and lead the
agenda for the responsible development and deployment
of biotechnology.464 The summit should strive for a set of
high-level commitments, similar to the 2023 Bletchley
Declaration, outlining key principles and values for
responsible biotechnology research, development, and
use.465 More ambitiously, it could outline opportunities
for biotechnology-leading nations to partner on joint
biotechnology safety research and responsible diffusion
to emerging markets. Similarly, the United States should
lead an effort through the G7 to articulate principles for
responsible biotechnology research, development, and
use, modeled after the success of the Hiroshima Process
International Guiding Principles for Organizations
Developing Advanced AI Systems.466
Set a global example by declaring
biotechnology red lines
The United States should lead the world by unilater-
ally clarifying red lines that it will not cross for certain
biotechnology applications—for instance, developing
bioweapons that target specific populations or essential
crops, deploying intrusive biosurveillance platforms, or
“designing” human embryos for certain desirable attri-
butes. As the leading biopower, the United States would
set a powerful example for other nations to follow by
voluntarily renouncing future applications. To develop
these standards, the White House should convene a Task
Force on Biotechnology Ethics to outline these red lines
and articulate principles and suggested federal policies to
govern responsible biotechnology research, development,
and use across the federal government.
Leverage security partnerships to drive joint
biotechnology R&D, investment, and talent
exchanges
There is considerable opportunity to elevate bio-
technology in long-standing and emerging security
partnerships, including NATO, AUKUS, the Quad, and the
U.S.–Japan–Republic of Korea trilateral relationship.
To start, the United States should leverage its board
representation and financial contribution to NATO’s DIANA
to prioritize biotechnology, which is now one of several of
focus areas. The United States should also modestly con-
tribute to the NIF, which could encourage other alliance
members to increase their engagement and help foster a
strong transatlantic biotechnology ecosystem.
For AUKUS, the United States should push to add
biotechnology to the agenda for Pillar II and integrate it
into the newly established AUKUS Advanced Capabilities
Industry Forum, AUKUS Defense Investor Network, and
trilateral innovation challenges.467
In addition, U.S. government officials and companies
should continue to mature the QUIN and prioritize
biotechnology investments beyond areas of health and
medicine, which already receive the overwhelming share
of private capital.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
59
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
Finally, the still-maturing trilateral partnership
between the United States, Japan, and the Republic of
Korea should launch a trilateral biotechnology industry
working group and negotiate a trilateral biotechnology
cooperation agreement outlining opportunities for joint
investment, trade, and talent exchange, as well as policy
and regulatory harmonization.468
Develop a strategy for shaping international
standards for biotechnology to align with U.S.
interests and democratic values
The White House should task the Department of State
(DOS), in consultation with cabinets represented on the
National Bioeconomy Board, to develop a strategy to
shape international standards for biotechnology through
the Codex Alimentarius, International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), WHO, OECD, and other relevant
international bodies, to promote alignment with dem-
ocratic values, ethics, responsible use, and fair market
principles.
Support U.S. biotechnology firms to secure global
market share
BGI, WuXi Biologics, and other Chinese biotechnology
firms are working to dominate emerging markets to
offset anticipated barriers to scaling in developed econ-
omies.469 Left unchecked, the continued proliferation of
Chinese biotechnology firms and products in emerging
markets could significantly boost China’s biotechnology
leadership by increasing overseas revenue available
for reinvestment in R&D, expanding and diversifying
their available health and genomic data for large-scale
analysis, and creating technological path dependency
that could confer commercial and geostrategic benefits
for years to come. The White House should task the DOS,
the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), and the U.S. Trade
and Development Agency with developing a working
group with industry to identify priority overseas markets
and coordinate diplomatic, financial, and other support
to broaden U.S. market share vis-à-vis Chinese firms.
Conclude bilateral and plurilateral digital
trade agreements with biotechnology-friendly
provisions
The USTR should prioritize negotiation of digital trade
agreements with biotechnology-leading allies and
partners, similar to the recently concluded Australia-
Singapore Digital Economy Agreement, that facilitate
secure exchange of biodata (deidentified as necessary),
reduce tariffs and regulatory barriers for biotechnology
products, and foster greater harmonization of relevant
standards.470

Build Public Trust

Strong and sustained U.S. leadership in biotechnology
requires enduring support from policymakers and the
public. However, both groups remain broadly unaware
of the looming biorevolution and its consequences
for America’s prosperity and security. Considerable
work remains to raise public awareness about the
biorevolution and build public trust. The botched public
communications for OWS—an unambiguous case of
American scientific and innovative prowess—missed
an opportunity to build public trust in the COVID-19
vaccines and remains a cautionary tale for the cost of
neglecting proactive public engagement.471
Like with AI, biotechnology applications require
proactive discussion about risks, ethics, mitigations,
and implications for democratic values. The United
States should set an example for the world with a pro-
active debate about responsible research, development,
and application of biotechnologies that aligns with a
long-standing ethical, legal, and societal implications
framework and respects core democratic values while
mitigating risks. Publics around the world have rea-
sonable questions, for instance, about the ethics of
editing—let alone designing—human and animal genomes
or developing treatments to reverse aging or augment
human brains with computers. Governments and busi-
nesses that sidestep these questions or assume popular
support may find their biotechnology ambitions stalled
by public opposition. Conversely, businesses and gov-
ernments now have an opportunity to anticipate these
challenges with concerted actions and mitigations that
build public awareness, buy-in, and trust.
Hold a national summit on the bioeconomy
Industry should partner with the federal government,
along with biotechnology-leading state governments such
as Massachusetts, Minnesota, and North Carolina, to

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
@CNASDC
60
convene a national summit to drive high-level attention
to the positive applications of biotechnology, make the
case for why biotechnology leadership is essential to U.S.
national and economic security, and expand the national
debate about responsible research, development, and use.
Senior executive branch leaders should make
the case for U.S. biotechnology leadership
High-level executive branch officials, including at a
minimum heads of the DoD, DOE, DOC, USDA, Treasury,
NSF, HHS, and NIH, along with the national security
advisor, should give keynote remarks across the country
articulating the opportunities for U.S. biotechnology
leadership, from improving defense capabilities and
human health to fighting climate change, achieving food
and energy security, and creating high-paying jobs across
the country—as well as the dangers of ceding that leader-
ship to authoritarian competitors such as China.
Congress should convene regular biotechnology
hearings to increase awareness among the
public and elected officials about the coming
biorevolution
Congress took a major step with the establishment of the
NSCEB, whose final report in early 2025 will help drive
public and policymaker attention to biotechnology.472
Still, relevant congressional committees should mirror
the energy they have devoted to AI with regular hearings
to explore the economic, security, societal, and other
implications of biotechnology for the United States.
Activity on this front has been scant. The Senate
Agriculture Committee has not held a biotechnology-fo-
cused session since 2015.473 The Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science, and Transportation held a subcom-
mittee hearing on biotechnology in 2020, but the full
committee has yet to devote one session to this critical
area.474 Although the Senate Committee on Homeland
Security and Governmental Affairs recently advanced
the BIOSECURE Act, it also has yet to hold a hearing
devoted to biotechnology.475
In the House, the Select Committee on the Chinese
Communist Party has brought much-needed attention to
biotechnology, including through a March 2024 hearing,
but other standing committees have yet to devote similar
attention.476 Congress should drive the national conver-
sation on the opportunities and risks of biotechnology
to ensure the public and policymakers are adequately
tracking rapid developments in the sector and providing
oversight as necessary.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
61
 Conclusion
Chapter 06
Now is the time for the United States
to define a future of biotechnology that
unlocks its vast potential for good,
while ensuring it develops responsibly,
transparently, and in alignment with
democratic values.
T
he biorevolution is here. The question is which
nation will lead it, shape it, and harness its power.
The country that embraces the biorevolution
with ambitious policies and investments will stand the
best chance to become the 21st century biopower and
secure vast potential benefits for national security and
competitiveness.
Stepping back, the United States enters the biorevo-
lution with formidable tailwinds, including its dynamic
capital markets, innovative private sector, world-leading
higher education institutions, and unrivaled STEM
talent. But inaction and complacency are the surest route
to surrendering the U.S. edge. To secure America’s place
as the global biopower, policymakers must take ambi-
tious steps to accelerate tailwinds through an increased
investment in broader biotechnology research and
applications, an expanded pipeline of biotalent, and a
strategy for prioritizing biotechnology in international
standards-setting and multilateral partnerships. At the
same time, policymakers must navigate headwinds that
imperil further progress—specifically, an anti-innova-
tion morass of conflicting standards, definitions, and
regulations for biotechnology; inaccessible and insecure
U.S. biodata, the fuel for biotechnology innovation; an
underdeveloped national infrastructure for biomanufac-
turing to promote broad-based innovation; and a lack of
public awareness and trust in emerging, ethically fraught
biotechnology applications such as human gene editing
and human-computer interfaces.
If any nation overtakes the United States as the global
biopower, it will be China. Significant public investment,
long-term policy and prioritization, a massive domestic
market, decades of largely unrestricted capital flows
and technology transfers, a growing talent base, and
amassing of biodata through both licit and illicit means
have helped China close the gap. Beijing already leads
high-impact research in biofuels, synthetic biology, and
biomanufacturing. Its scholars rank second in the world
for authoring biomedical papers. China is a biomanufac-
turing powerhouse, exporting roughly 40 percent of the
world’s active pharmaceutical ingredients.477 China now
aspires to move up the biotechnology value chain and
become a biotechnology superpower.
China’s ambition should inspire action from U.S.
policymakers to extend and secure America’s lead with
bold steps to drive research and innovation across the
spectrum of biotechnologies, expand American bio-
talent, responsibly unleash U.S. biodata, leverage global
partnerships, and build public trust. Now is the time
for the United States to define a future of biotechnology
that unlocks its vast potential for good, while ensuring
it develops responsibly, transparently, and in alignment
with democratic values. The United States led the 20th
century in biotechnology, but considerable work remains
to secure its position as the global biopower of the 21st.

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
@CNASDC
 Appendix: Cost Justification
 for Recommendations
62
This table details the costs and justifications for the various recommendations outlined in this report, which total
roughly $20 billion in new federal funding. The amounts only indicate new funding beyond recently enacted levels.
Some recommendations are budgeted for a single fiscal year; others are budgeted for up to a decade. Policymakers
should consider this the floor of an all-out strategy to secure U.S. biotechnology leadership.
Recommendation New Funding Explanation
Preserve and extend the
Qualified Advanced Energy
Project Credit
$4 billion
The Inflation Reduction Act allocated $4 billion for the Qualified Advanced Energy Project
Credit. Projects that begin construction by the end of 2024 would be eligible. This would
make an additional $4 billion available to extend the credit for projects that launch by the
end of 2026.
Double funding for the DoD’s
Tri-Service Biotechnology for a
Resilient Supply Chain program
and Distributed Bioindustrial
Manufacturing Program
$6.35 billion
The Department of Defense (DoD) allocated $270 million for the Tri-Service Biotechnology
for a Resilient Supply Chain program and $1 billion for the Distributed Bioindustrial
Manufacturing Program, for a total of $1.27 billion over five years starting in 2022. The
authors recommend doubling this funding level to $2.54 billion and extending it at this
higher level for an additional five years, for a total of $6.35 billion in new funding.
Double funding for DARPA’s
Biological Technologies Office
for a decade
$1.73 billion
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) allocated $345 million in
FY2024 for the Materials and Biological Technology Program Element. Congress should
double the funding to $690 million annually—an increase of $345 million—and sustain this
higher funding level for five years.
Fund NIH’s FY2025 budget
request and specify
biotechnology priorities
$2.4 billion The National Institutes of Health (NIH) requested $50.2 billion for FY2025—$2.4 billion
more than its FY2023 appropriation.
Scale the Advanced Research
Projects Agency for Health’s
funding to at least $3 billion
$1.5 billion FY2023 funding was $1.5 billion. The authors recommend doubling it to $3 billion.
Build a national biofoundry
network $750 million The National Science Foundation (NSF) has made $75 million a year available for awards.
Doubling this amount would raise it to $150 million annually over 10 years.
Restore funding for NIH’s
Innovation Account $678 million FY2024 funding was $407 million, and FY2023 funding was $1.085 billion. Restoring
funding to FY2023 levels would cost $678 million.
Fund NSF’s FY2025 budget
request $643 million NSF requested $10.185 billion for FY2025—$643 million more than its FY2023
appropriation.
Expand America’s Seed Fund and
specify a focus on biotechnology $500 million This would allocate $50 million annually over the next decade for biotechnology-specific
ventures.
Increase NSF funding for the
Graduate Research Fellowship
Program to roughly 4,500
fellowships
$318.67 million This would double the FY2023 level of $318.67 million.
Fund the National Institute for
Standards and Technology $311.5 million The National Institute for Standards and Technology requested an additional $311.5 million
for FY2025.
Fund Biotechnology Moonshots
and Bold Goals $201.54 million
The Department of Energy (DOE) requested $36.54 million above FY2023 levels for
Biological and Environmental Research and $95 million above FY2024 for the Office of
Manufacturing and Energy Supply Chains; the U.S. Department of Agriculture requested
$50 million for the Agriculture Advanced Research and Development Authority (AgARDA);
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) requested $20 million more in
FY2025 for the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA).
Develop a secure American
Biobank $116 million $116 million is roughly half the initial cost of developing the UK Biobank ($234 million). This
initial public investment could leverage private capital to cover the rest.
Strengthen cybersecurity at
hospitals, etc. $12 million HHS requested $12 million for FY2025 for its Critical Infrastructure Program.
Fulfill the DOE budget requests $5 million The DOE requested $5 million for FY2025 for its Office of Critical and Emerging
Technologies.
Total $19.51 billion

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
63
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology63
1. Michael Chui et al., “The Bio Revolution: Innovations
Transforming Economies, Societies, and Our Lives,” McK-
insey & Company, May 13, 2020, https://www.mckinsey.
com/industries/life-sciences/our-insights/the-bio-rev-
olution-innovations-transforming-economies-soci-
eties-and-our-lives.
2. “Learn More About UK Biobank,” UK Biobank, August 13,
2024, https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/learn-more-about-
uk-biobank.
3. Alex Keown, “France Aims to Become European Leader
in Life Sciences Innovation,” BioSpace, June 20, 2022,
https://www.biospace.com/france-eyes-growth-in-life-
sciences-industry-aims-to-become-top-ecosystem-in-eu-
rope.
4. Jules Adam, “ Japan’s Ten Hottest Biotech Companies in
Healthcare,” Labiotech, February 27 , 2024, https://www.
labiotech.eu/best-biotech/japan-hottest-biotech-health-
care.
5. “Leap to Global Top 3 in AI—Semiconductor, Advanced
Biotechnology & Quantum Technology,” Office of the
President, Republic of Korea, April 26, 2024, https://eng.
president.go.kr/briefing/yKPaTKzX.
6. Anna B. Puglisi and Chryssa Rask, China, Biotechnology,
and BGI: How China’s Hybrid Economy Skews Competi-
tion (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, May
2024), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/chi-
na-biotechnology-and-bgi.
7 . Jamie Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker: The
Global Race for Future Power (Australian Strategic Policy
Institute, February 2023), https://ad-aspi.s3.ap-south-
east-2.amazonaws.com/2023-08/ASPIs%20Critical%20
Technology%20Tracker.pdf.
8. Aaron Dudley, “The Chinese API Market,” Mantell Asso-
ciates, accessed July 28, 2024, https://www.mantellassoci-
ates.com/the-chinese-api-market.
9. Carol Kuntz, “Biotech Matters: Problems with Life Sci-
ence Databases in the United States,” May 1, 2024, Center
for a New American Security, https://www.cnas.org/pub-
lications/reports/biotech-matters-problems-with-life-
science-databases-in-the-united-states.
10. “Recombinant DNA in the Lab,” Smithsonian Institution,
accessed July 28, 2024, https://www.si.edu/spotlight/
birth-of-biotech/recombinant-dna-in-the-lab; Komaljeet
Gill et al., “RDT and Genetic Engineering: Basic of RDT
Method, PCR, and Application,” chap. 13 in Basic Biotech-
niques for Bioprocess and Bioentrepreneurship, eds. Arvind
Kumar Bhatt, Ravi Kant Bhatia, and Tek Chand Bhalla
(Academic Press, 2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-816109-8.00013-1.
11. Gill et al., “RDT and Genetic Engineering: Basic of RDT
Method, PCR, and Application.”
12. Priya Duggal et al., “The Evolving Field of Genetic
Epidemiology: From Familial Aggregation to Genomic
Sequencing,” American Journal of Epidemiology 188, no.
12 (2019): 2069–2077 , https://academic.oup.com/aje/arti-
cle/188/12/2069/5566320; Diana Cano Bordajandi, “How
the Human Genome Project Shook the World of Cancer
Research,” The Institute of Cancer Research, February
15, 2021, https://www.icr.ac.uk/news-features/latest-fea-
tures/how-the-human-genome-project-shook-the-world-
of-cancer-research.
13. “The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2020,” The Nobel Prize,
accessed July 28, 2024, https://www.nobelprize.org/priz-
es/chemistry/2020/popular-information.
14. “The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2023,” The
Nobel Prize, accessed July 28, 2024, https://www.nobel-
prize.org/prizes/medicine/2023/press-release.
15. “China’s CAR T Market Comes of Age,” BioWorld, Octo-
ber 9, 2024, https://www.bioworld.com/China_CAR_T.
16. Joseph R. Biden, “Executive Order on Advancing Biotech-
nology and Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustain-
able, Safe, and Secure American Bioeconomy,” The White
House, September 22, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2022/09/12/
executive-order-on-advancing-biotechnology-and-bio-
manufacturing-innovation-for-a-sustainable-safe-and-se-
cure-american-bioeconomy.
1 7. Marcy E. Gallo, The Bioeconomy: A Primer, CRS Report
No. R46881 (Congressional Research Service, September
19, 2022), https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/
R46881.
18. Safeguarding the Bioeconomy (National Academies Press,
2020), 73, https://doi.org/10.17226/25525; Gallo, The Bio-
economy: A Primer.
19. Chui et al., “The Bio Revolution: Innovations Transform-
ing Economies, Societies, and Our Lives.”
20. Kris A. Wetterstrand, “The Cost of Sequencing a Human
Genome,” National Human Genome Research Institute,
November 1, 2021, https://www.genome.gov/about-ge-
nomics/fact-sheets/Sequencing-Human-Genome-cost.
21. Tara O’Toole, The Biorevolution: Its Implications for U .S.
National Security, Economic Competitiveness, and National
Power (In-Q-Tel, Inc., February 2023), https://assets.iqt.
org/pdfs/The_Biorevolution_Feb_2023.pdf/web/viewer.
html; Kris A. Wetterstrand, “DNA Sequencing Costs:
Data,” National Human Genome Research Institute, May
16, 2023, https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/fact-
sheets/DNA-Sequencing-Costs-Data; Jeremy Preston,
Ashley VanZeeland, and Daniel A. Peiffer, “Innovation at
Illumina: The Road to the $600 Human Genome,” Nature,
accessed July 8, 2024, https://www.nature.com/articles/
d42473-021-00030-9.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
@CNASDC
64
22. “The Pandemic’s True Death Toll,” The Economist, Octo-
ber 25, 2022, https://www.economist.com/graphic-detail/
coronavirus-excess-deaths-estimates; “Funding Over-
view,” Pandemic Oversight, accessed July 8, 2024, https://
www.pandemicoversight.gov/data-interactive-tools/fund-
ing-overview.
23. Chui et al., “The Bio Revolution: Innovations Transform-
ing Economies, Societies, and Our Lives.”
24. “Understanding COVID-19 mRNA Vaccines,” National
Human Genome Research Institute, August 30, 2021,
https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/fact-sheets/
Understanding-COVID-19-mRNA-Vaccines; Thomas Gaj,
Charles A. Gersbach, and Carlos F. Barbas, III, “ZFN,
TALEN, and CRISPR/Cas-Based Methods for Genome
Engineering,” Trends in Biotechnology 31, no. 7 (July 2013):
397–405, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2013.04.004;
Chui et al., “The Bio Revolution: Innovations Transform-
ing Economies, Societies, and Our Lives.”
25. “Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine,”
National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioen-
gineering, accessed July 9, 2024, https://www.nibib.
nih.gov/science-education/science-topics/tissue-engi-
neering-and-regenerative-medicine; Ivana Pajcin et al.,
“Bioengineering Outlook on Cultivated Meat Production,”
Micromachines 13, no. 3 (February 28, 2022): 402, https://
doi.org/10.3390/mi13030402; Ruma Rani et al., “Bioen-
gineered Polymer/Composites as Advanced Biological
Detection of Sorbitol: An Application in Healthcare
Sector,” Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 20, no. 11
(2020): 963–981, https://doi.org/10.2174/156802662066
6200306131416; Daniela Matias de C. Bittencourt et al.,
“Bioengineering of Spider Silks for the Production of Bio-
medical Materials,” Frontiers in Bioengineering and Bio-
technology 10 (August 8, 2022), https://doi.org/10.3389/
fbioe.2022.958486; Barabadi, Hamed, et al. “Bioengi-
neered Metal-Based Antimicrobial Nanomaterials for
Surface Coatings,” chap. 17 in Antiviral and Antimicrobial
Smart Coatings: Fundamentals and Applications, eds.
Aditya Kumar et al. (Elsevier, 2023), 489–539, https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99291-6.00012-8.
26. “Stem Cell Basics,” National Institutes of Health, accessed
July 9, 2024, https://stemcells.nih.gov/info/basics/stc-ba-
sics; Lan Zhao et al., “Neural Stem Cell Therapy for Brain
Disease,” World Journal of Stem Cells 13, no. 9 (September
26, 2021): 1278–1292, https://doi.org/10.4252/wjsc.v13.
i9.1278; “UW Study Finds Photoreceptor Cells From Ret-
inal Organoids Can Replicate Key Functions of Vision,”
University of Wisconsin–Madison School of Medicine
and Public Health, February 2, 2022, https://www.med.
wisc.edu/news/photoreceptor-cells-replicate-key-vi-
sion-function; Chin Siang Ong et al., “3D Bioprinting
Using Stem Cells,” Pediatric Research 83, no. 1 (January
2018): 223–231, https://doi.org/10.1038/pr.2017 .252.
2 7. Kristen Rogers, “When We’ll Be Able to 3D-Print Organs
and Who Will Be Able to Afford Them,” CNN, March 10,
2023, https://www.cnn.com/2022/06/10/health/3d-print-
ed-organs-bioprinting-life-itself-wellness-scn/index.html.
28. Sara Spary, “British Man Given 3D Printed Eye in World
First, Hospital Says,” CNN, November 25, 2021, https://
www.cnn.com/2021/11/25/health/3d-printed-eye-scli-
intl-gbr-scn/index.html; Rogers, “When We’ll Be Able to
3D-Print Organs and Who Will Be Able to Afford Them.”
29. Sébastien Levesque and Daniel E. Bauer, “Gene Cor-
rection for Sickle Cell Disease Hits Its Prime,” Nature
Biomedical Engineering 7 (2023): 605–606, https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41551-023-01040-2; Moran Yadid et al., “Bio-
engineering Approaches to Treat the Failing Heart: From
Cell Biology to 3D Printing,” Nature Reviews Cardiology 19
(2022): 83–99, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41569-021-00603-7.
30. Janis Peksa and Dmytro Mamchur, “State-of-the-Art on
Brain-Computer Interface Technology,” Sensors 23, no. 13
(June 28, 2023): 6001, https://doi.org/10.3390/s23136001.
31. Lorea Mar-Barrutia et al., “Deep Brain Stimulation for
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Systematic Review
of Worldwide Experience After 20 Years,” World Jour-
nal of Psychiatry 11, no. 9 (September 19, 2021): 659–680,
https://doi.org/10.5498/wjp.v11.i9.659; “Brain Stimulation
Therapies,” National Institute of Mental Health, accessed
July 12, 2024, https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/
brain-stimulation-therapies/brain-stimulation-thera-
pies; Katherine W . Scangos et al., “Closed-Loop Neuro-
modulation in an Individual with Treatment-Resistant
Depression,” Nature Medicine 27 , no. 10 (October 2021):
1696–1700, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01480-w.
32. “Cochlear Implants,” National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders, June 13, 2024, https://
www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/cochlear-implants.
33. Stephen Baak, “Neuroprosthetics and the Bionic Human,”
Temple University, December 20, 2021, https://greymat-
tersjournaltu.org/issue-2/neuroprosthetics-and-the-bion-
ic-human.
34. “Neuralink’s First Human Patient Able to Control
Mouse Through Thinking, Musk Says,” Reuters, Feb-
ruary 20, 2024, https://www.reuters.com/business/
healthcare-pharmaceuticals/neuralinks-first-human-
patient-able-control-mouse-through-thinking-musk-
says-2024-02-20.
35. “First Successful Implantation of Revolutionary Wireless
Visual Prosthesis Brain Implant,” Illinois Tech, Febru-
ary 16, 2022, https://www.iit.edu/news/first-success-
ful-implantation-revolutionary-wireless-visual-prosthe-
sis-brain-implant.
36. “Musk’s Neuralink Gets FDA’s Breakthrough Device Tag
for ‘Blindsight’ Implant,” Reuters, September 18, 2024,
https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharma-
ceuticals/musks-neuralink-receives-fdas-breakthrough-
device-tag-brain-implant-2024-09-17.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
65
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
3 7. “Notable A.I. Models,” Epoch AI, updated October 9,
2024, https://epochai.org/data/notable-ai-models.
38. Lucy Hampton, “The Cost of Computing and the Pro-
ductivity Puzzle,” Bennett Institute for Public Policy,
Cambridge University, blog, July 17 , 2023, https://www.
bennettinstitute.cam.ac.uk/blog/cost-of-computing.
39. Scott Moore, China’s Role in the Global Biotechnology
Sector and Implications for US Policy (Brookings Institu-
tion, April 2020), https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
chinas-role-in-the-global-biotechnology-sector-and-im-
plications-for-us-policy.
40. Moore, China’s Role in the Global Biotechnology Sector and
Implications for US Policy.
41. “New Biotechnology Executive Order Will Advance DoD
Biotechnology Initiatives for America’s Economic and Na-
tional Security,” U.S. Department of Defense, September
14, 2022, https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Re-
lease/Article/3157504/new-biotechnology-executive-or-
der-will-advance-DoD-biotechnology-initiatives-fo.
42. “Biofuels,” Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,
accessed July 22, 2024, https://www.darpa.mil/program/
biofuels.
43. Timothy Marler and Daniel M. Gerstein, “Biotechnology
and Today’s Warfighter,” RAND Corporation, October 25,
2022, https://www.rand.org/pubs/commentary/2022/10/
biotechnology-and-todays-warfighter.html; Alexander
McNamara, “Environmentally Friendly ‘Living Concrete’
Capable of Self-Healing,” BBC, January 15, 2020, https://
www.sciencefocus.com/news/environmentally-friend-
ly-living-concrete-capable-of-self-healing; “Spider Silk,”
Kraig Biocraft Laboratories, October 13, 2014, https://
www.kraiglabs.com/spider-silk.
44. Clara Rodríguez Fernández, “Airbus Will Use Recom-
binant Spider Silk to Build Lightweight Planes,” Labio-
tech, September 12, 2018, https://www.labiotech.eu/
trends-news/airbus-amsilk-spider-silk-planes; Diane
Dieuliis, “Biotechnology for the Battlefield: In Need of a
Strategy,” War on the Rocks, November 27 , 2018, https://
warontherocks.com/2018/11/biotechnology-for-the-bat-
tlefield-in-need-of-a-strategy; Andrew Stewart, “The
‘Living Concrete’ That Can Heal Itself,” CNN, March 7 ,
2016, https://www.cnn.com/2015/05/14/tech/biocon-
crete-delft-jonkers/index.html.
45. National Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnology:
Interim Report (National Security Commission on Emerg-
ing Biotechnology, December 2023), https://www.biotech.
senate.gov/press-releases/interim-report.
46. Josh Luckenbaugh, “New Biosensor Uses E. Coli to Detect
Landmines,” National Defense, November 17 , 2023, https://
www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2023/11/17/
new-biosensor-uses-e-coli-to-detect-landmines.
4 7. “New Biotechnology Executive Order Will Advance DoD
Biotechnology Initiatives for America’s Economic and
National Security.”
48. Chui et al., “The Bio Revolution: Innovations Transform-
ing Economies, Societies, and Our Lives.”
49. “Declaration 2023,” World Bioeconomy Forum, December
12, 2023, https://wcbef.com/about-us/declarations/decla-
ration-2023; Chui et al., “The Bio Revolution: Innovations
Transforming Economies, Societies, and Our Lives.”
50. O’Toole, The Biorevolution: Its Implications for U .S. Na-
tional Security, Economic Competitiveness, and National
Power.
51. “Spotlight: Tackling the Climate Crisis,” U.S. Department
of Defense, accessed September 20, 2024, https://www.
defense.gov/Spotlights/Tackling-the-Climate-Crisis.
52. David Vergun, “Defense Secretary Calls Climate Change
an Existential Threat,” U.S. Department of Defense,
accessed September 20, 2024, https://www.defense.gov/
news/news-stories/article/article/2582051/defense-sec-
retary-calls-climate-change-an-existential-threat.
53. “Harnessing Biotechnology to Accelerate Advanced
Biofuels Production,” Office of Energy Efficiency & Re-
newable Energy, April 12, 2016, https://www.energy.gov/
eere/articles/harnessing-biotechnology-accelerate-ad-
vanced-biofuels-production.
54. John Fialka and E&E News, “Start-Up Hopes ‘Super’
Poplar Trees Will Suck Up More CO2,” Scientific Amer-
ican, February 9, 2023, https://www.scientificamerican.
com/article/start-up-hopes-super-poplar-trees-will-
suck-up-more-co2; Helen Onyeaka, et. al,” Minimizing
Carbon Footprint via Microalgae as a Biological Capture,”
Carbon Capture Science & Technology 1 (December 2021),
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2772656821000075.
55. François Candelon et al., “Synthetic Biology Is About to
Disrupt Your Industry,” Boston Consulting Group, Febru-
ary 10, 2022, https://www.bcg.com/publications/2022/
synthetic-biology-is-about-to-disrupt-your-industry.
56. Dana Goodyear, “Dangerous Designs,” The New Y orker,
September 2, 2023, https://www.newyorker.com/mag-
azine/2023/09/11/the-transformative-alarming-pow-
er-of-gene-editing; “CRISPR,” National Human Genome
Research Institute, October 9, 2024, https://www.genome.
gov/genetics-glossary/CRISPR.
5 7. Dennis Normile, “In Wake of Gene-Edited Baby Scandal,
China Sets New Ethics Rules for Human Studies,” Science,
March 7 , 2023, https://www.science.org/content/article/
wake-gene-edited-baby-scandal-china-sets-new-ethics-
rules-human-studies.

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
@CNASDC
66
58. Sui-Lee Wee and Paul Mozur, “China Uses DNA to Map
Faces, with Help From the West,” The New Y ork Times,
December 3, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/03/
business/china-dna-uighurs-xinjiang.html.
59. U.S. Department of Commerce, “Commerce Acts to Deter
Misuse of Biotechnology, Other U.S. Technologies by the
People’s Republic of China to Support Surveillance and
Military Modernization that Threaten National Security,”
press release, December 16, 2021, https://www.commerce.
gov/news/press-releases/2021/12/commerce-acts-de-
ter-misuse-biotechnology-other-us-technologies-peoples.
60. Matthew S. Borman, “Addition of Certain Entities to the
Entity List and Revision of an Entry on the Entity List,”
Federal Register, December 17 , 2021, https://www.federal-
register.gov/documents/2021/12/17/2021-27406/addition-
of-certain-entities-to-the-entity-list-and-revision-of-an-
entry-on-the-entity-list.
61. Elsa B. Kania and Wilson Vorndick, “Weaponizing
Biotech: How China’s Military Is Preparing for a ‘New
Domain of Warfare,’” Defense One, August 14, 2019,
https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2019/08/chinas-mili-
tary-pursuing-biotech/159167.
62. The Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Biotech-
nology: Plain Language Information on the Biotechnology
Regulatory System, U .S. Department of Agriculture, U .S.
Environmental Protection Agency, and U .S. Food and Drug
Administration, November 2023, https://usbiotechnology-
regulation.mrp.usda.gov/eo14081-8b-plain-language.pdf.
63. “Coordinated Framework for Regulation of Biotechnolo-
gy,” 51 FR 23302, Office of Science and Technology Policy,
June 26, 1986, https://www.aphis.usda.gov/sites/default/
files/coordinated_framework.pdf.
64. “Biotechnology: White House Directs EPA, FDA, and
USDA to Update the Coordinated Framework for the
Regulation of Biotechnology,” Bergeson & Campbell,
PC, July 6, 2015, https://www.lawbc.com/biotechnol-
ogy-white-house-directs-epa-fda-and-usda-to-up-
date-the-coordinated-framework-for-the-regula-
tion-of-biotechnology.
65. Gary M. Owens, “New FDA Drug Approvals Hit an
18- Year High in 2014,” American Health & Drug Benefits
8, Spec Feature (March 2015): 15–17 , https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4665053; Judit Sandor,
“Genome Editing: Learning from Its Past and Envisioning
Its Future,” in Governing, Protecting, and Regulating the
Future of Genome Editing (Brill, 2023), 17–34, https://doi.
org/10.1163/9789004526136_003.
66. “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA),” Public Health Law, Centers for Disease
Control, accessed July 11, 2024, https://www.cdc.gov/
phlp/php/resources/health-insurance-portability-and-ac-
countability-act-of-1996-hipaa.html.
6 7. “HIPAA Basics for Providers: Privacy, Security, & Breach
Notification Rules,” Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services and Medicare Learning Network, February 2023,
https://www.cms.gov/outreach-and-education/medi-
care-learning-network-mln/mlnproducts/downloads/
hipaaprivacyandsecurity.pdf.
68. Mark E. Schreiber and Patrick J. Concannon, “HIPAA
Issues for Biotech and Life Science Companies: On the
Frontier of Science and on the Edge of HIPAA,” Palmer &
Dodge LLP , https://www.ehcca.com/presentations/HI-
PAA10/5_03_h1.pdf.
69. “Transcript of the May 25, 2016 NCVHS Subcommittee
on Privacy, Confidentiality & Security Hearing,” National
Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, accessed July
30, 2024, https://ncvhs.hhs.gov/transcripts-minutes/
transcript-of-the-may-25-2016-ncvhs-subcommit-
tee-on-privacy-confidentiality-security-hearing; Barbara
J. Evans and Gail P . Jarvik, “Impact of HIPAA’s Minimum
Necessary Standard on Genomic Data Sharing,” Genetics
in Medicine 20, no. 5 (May 2018): 531–535, https://doi.
org/10.1038/gim.2017 .141.
70. John P . Holdren et al., “Improving Transparency and
Ensuring Continued Safety in Biotechnology,” The
White House, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/
blog/2015/07/02/improving-transparency-and-ensur-
ing-continued-safety-biotechnology.
71. “Biological Technologies Office Opens,” Defense Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency, 2014, https://www.
darpa.mil/about-us/timeline/bto-opens.
72. Donald J. Trump, “Executive Order on Modernizing the
Regulatory Framework for Agricultural Biotechnolo-
gy Products,” The White House, June 11, 2019, https://
trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/exec-
utive-order-modernizing-regulatory-framework-agricul-
tural-biotechnology-products.
73. Jennifer Kuzma, “Biotechnology Oversight Gets an
Early Make-Over by Trump’s White House and USDA:
Part 1—The Executive Order,” Genetic Engineering and
Society Center, June 18, 2019, https://ges.research.ncsu.
edu/2019/06/ag-biotech-oversight-makeover-part-1-eo.
74. “Unified Website for Biotechnology Regulation,” USDA,
FDA, and EPA, accessed July 30, 2024, https://usbiotech-
nologyregulation.mrp.usda.gov/biotechnologygov/home.
75. “DOD Approves $87 Million for Newest Bioindustrial
Manufacturing Innovation Institute,” U.S. Department
of Defense, October 20, 2020, https://www.defense.
gov/News/Releases/Release/Article/2388087/DoD-ap-
proves-87-million-for-newest-bioindustrial-manufactu-
ring-innovation-insti.
76. “BioMADE: Revitalizing U.S. Biomanufacturing and Fos-
tering Collaboration,” SIMB News 73, no. 4, (October/No-

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
67
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
vember/December 2023): 119–126, https://www.simbhq.
org/docs/simbnews/OctDec2023_SIMBNEWS.pdf.
7 7. “BioMADE: Revitalizing U.S. Biomanufacturing and Fos-
tering Collaboration.”
78. Daniel O’Brien, “Energy Earthshots: The Frontier of
Climate Innovation,” Environmental and Energy Study In-
stitute, February 1, 2024, https://www.eesi.org/briefings/
view/020124doe.
79. “DOE Launches New Energy Earthshot to Cut Industrial
Heating Emissions by 85 Percent,” U.S. Department of
Energy, September 21, 2022, https://www.energy.gov/
articles/doe-launches-new-energy-earthshot-cut-indus-
trial-heating-emissions-85-percent.
80. Biden, “Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology and
Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and
Secure American Bioeconomy.”
81. Biden, “Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology and
Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and
Secure American Bioeconomy.”
82. “The Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Bio-
technology Plain Language Information on the Biotech-
nology Regulatory System.”
83. “The Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Bio-
technology Plain Language Information on the Biotech-
nology Regulatory System.”
84. Bold Goals for U .S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing:
Harnessing Research and Development to Further Societal
Goals, The White House Office of Science and Technol-
ogy Policy, March 2023, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Bold-Goals-for-U.S.-Bio-
technology-and-Biomanufacturing-Harnessing-Re-
search-and-Development-To-Further-Societal-Goals-FI-
NAL.pdf.
85. “Bioeconomy EO Tracker,” Federation of American Sci-
entists, July 2, 2024, https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/8x-
al2/10.
86. Bold Goals for U .S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing:
Harnessing Research and Development to Further Societal
Goals.
8 7. Bold Goals for U .S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing:
Harnessing Research and Development to Further Societal
Goals.
88. Rebecca Coons, “Policymakers Take Notice of Bioeco-
nomy’s Potential,” Industrial Biotechnology 18, no. 5
(2022): 263–265, https://liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/
ind.2022.29290.editorial.
89. “FACT SHEET: The United States Announces New
Investments and Resources to Advance President
Biden’s National Biotechnology and Biomanufac-
turing Initiative,” The White House, September 14,
2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2022/09/14/fact-sheet-the-unit-
ed-states-announces-new-investments-and-resourc-
es-to-advance-president-bidens-national-biotechnolo-
gy-and-biomanufacturing-initiative.
90. “BioMADE Receives $450M Budget Increase from the
Department of Defense,” BioMADE, March 7 , 2023,
https://www.biomade.org/news/biomade-budget-in-
crease.
91. “BioFoundries to Enable Access to Infrastructure and
Resources for Advancing Modern Biology and Biotech-
nology (BioFoundries),” U.S. National Science Foundation,
May 5, 2023, https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/
biofoundries-enable-access-infrastructure.
92. “BioFoundries to Enable Access to Infrastructure and Re-
sources for Advancing Modern Biology and Biotechnology
(BioFoundries).”
93. Cheryl Walker, “WFU Awarded $160M NSF Grant to
Advance Regenerative Medicine,” Wake Forest News,
January 26, 2024, http://news.wfu.edu/2024/01/26/
wfu-awarded-160m-nsf-grant-to-advance-regenera-
tive-medicine; “Piedmont Triad Regenerative Medicine
Engine,” U.S. National Science Foundation, accessed July
30, 2024, https://new.nsf.gov/funding/initiatives/region-
al-innovation-engines/portfolio/piedmont-triad-regener-
ative-medicine-engine.
94. “Biden-Harris Administration Designates 31 Tech Hubs
Across America,” U.S. Economic Development Admin-
istration, October 23, 2023, https://www.eda.gov/news/
press-release/2023/10/23/biden-harris-administra-
tion-designates-31-tech-hubs-across-america.
95. “FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announc-
es 31 Regional Tech Hubs to Spur American Innovation,
Strengthen Manufacturing, and Create Good-Pay-
ing Jobs in Every Region of the Country,” The White
House, October 23, 2023, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2023/10/23/
fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announces-31-re-
gional-tech-hubs-to-spur-american-innovation-strength-
en-manufacturing-and-create-good-paying-jobs-in-every-
region-of-the-country.
96. “Section 1091, FY22 National Defense Authorization Act,”
National Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnol-
ogy, accessed July 30, 2024, https://www.biotech.senate.
gov/section-1091-fy22-ndaa.
9 7. National Security Commission on Emerging Biotechnology:
Interim Report.
98. “Charting the Future of Biotechnology,” National Security
Commission on Emerging Biotechnology, accessed July

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
@CNASDC
68
30, 2024, https://www.biotech.senate.gov.
99. “Best Global Universities for Biotechnology and Applied
Microbiology,” U.S. News & World Report,” accessed July
28, 2024, https://www.usnews.com/education/best-glob-
al-universities/biotechnology-applied-microbiology.
100. The U .S. Bioscience Industry: Fostering Innovation and
Driving America’s Economy Forward, TEConomy Partners
LLC, Biotechnology Innovation Organization, and Coun-
cil of State Bioscience Associations, 2022, https://go.bio.
org/rs/490-EHZ-999/images/TEConomy_BIO_2022_Re-
port.pdf.
101. The U .S. Bioscience Industry: Fostering Innovation and
Driving America’s Economy Forward.
102. “ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker,” Australian Strate-
gic Policy Institute, September 22, 2023, https://ad-aspi.
s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/2023-09/All%20tech-
nologies%20by%20top%205%20countries%20and%20
tech%20monopoly%20risk_0.pdf.
103. “ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.”
104. “ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.”
105. Scott Moore, “In Biotech, the Industry of the Future, the
U.S. Is Way Ahead of China,” Lawfare, February 17 , 2021,
https://www.lawfaremedia.org/article/biotech-industry-
future-us-way-ahead-china; “The Sinovac-CoronaVac
COVID-19 Vaccine: What You Need to Know,” World
Health Organization, June 10, 2022, https://www.who.int/
news-room/feature-stories/detail/the-sinovac-covid-19-
vaccine-what-you-need-to-know.
106. Alessandra Zimmermann, “U.S. R&D and Innovation in a
Global Context: The 2023 Data Update,” American Associ-
ation for the Advancement of Science, April 2023, https://
www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/2023-05/AAASpercent-
20Globalpercent20RDpercent20Updatepercent20Aprilp-
ercent202023.pdf.
107 . Joe Kennedy, “How to Ensure That America’s Life-Sci-
ences Sector Remains Globally Competitive,” March 26,
2018, https://itif.org/publications/2018/03/26/how-en-
sure-americas-life-sciences-sector-remains-globally-com-
petitive.
108. “Number of Nobel Prize Laureates for Chemistry by
Nationality 1901–2023,” Statista, accessed July 29,
2024, https://www.statista.com/statistics/262895/
nobel-prize-laureates-for-chemistry-by-nationali-
ty-since-1901; “All Nobel Prizes in Chemistry,” The Nobel
Prize, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.nobelprize.
org/prizes/lists/all-nobel-prizes-in-chemistry.
109. Bart Brown, ed., Biotechnology in a Global Economy, OTA-
BA-494, U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment
(U.S. Government Printing Office, October 1991), https://
ota.fas.org/reports/9110.pdf.
110. Christopher V . Pece, “Federal Obligations for R&D In-
creased Nearly 14% in FY 2021, Supported by COVID-19
Pandemic-Related Funding,” NSF 23-352, National Center
for Science and Engineering Statistics, September 25,
2023, https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf23352.
111. “Budget,” National Institutes of Health, October 3, 2024,
https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/budget;
“Direct Economic Contributions,” National Institutes of
Health, December 8, 2023, https://www.nih.gov/about-
nih/what-we-do/impact-nih-research/serving-society/
direct-economic-contributions.
112. Brown, Biotechnology in a Global Economy.
113. “Deciphering the Genetic Code: National Historic Chemi-
cal Landmark,” American Chemical Society, accessed July
29, 2024, https://www.acs.org/education/whatischemis-
try/landmarks/geneticcode.html.
114. “Decades in the Making: mRNA COVID-19 Vaccines,” Na-
tional Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, April
4, 2024, https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-conditions/
decades-making-mrna-covid-19-vaccines.
115. “Biotechnology,” U.S. National Science Foundation,
accessed July 24, 2024, https://new.nsf.gov/focus-areas/
biotechnology.
116. “American Leadership in Biotechnology,” U.S. National
Science Foundation, https://www.nsf.gov/news/fact-
sheets/Factsheet_BioTech_v04.pdf.
117 . These directorates range from the Directorate of Bio-
logical Sciences, which supports fundamental biology
research to advance genomics to biomechanics, to the
Directorate for Computer and Information Sciences and
Engineering, which supports foundational and applica-
tion-oriented biotechnology research. “Bioeconomy &
Advanced Biotechnology Research at NSF,” U.S. National
Science Foundation, Biological Sciences, accessed July 29,
2024, https://www.nsf.gov/bio/MetaProgram/Bioecon-
Biotech.jsp.
118. “Biotechnology,” U.S. Department of Agriculture, accessed
July 29, 2024, https://www.usda.gov/topics/biotechnology.
119. “What Is the BioPreferred Program?” U.S. Department of
Agriculture, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.biopre-
ferred.gov/BioPreferred/faces/pages/AboutBioPreferred.
xhtml.
120. Wetterstrand, “The Cost of Sequencing a Human Ge-
nome.”
121. “Human Genome Project Produces Many Benefits,”
National Human Genome Research Institute, November
17 , 2011, https://www.genome.gov/27549135/nov-2011-hu-
man-genome-project-produces-many-benefits.
122. “About Us – PEPFAR,” U.S. Department of State, accessed

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
69
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
July 29, 2024, https://www.state.gov/about-us-pepfar.
123. “President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR),”
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, May 15, 2022, https://
www.fda.gov/international-programs/presidents-emer-
gency-plan-aids-relief-pepfar; Hussain S. Lalani, Jerry
Avorn, and Aaron S. Kesselheim, “US Taxpayers Heavily
Funded the Discovery of COVID-19 Vaccines,” Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics 111, no. 3 (March 2022):
542–544, https://doi.org/10.1002/cpt.2344.
124. Lalani, Avorn, and Kesselheim, “US Taxpayers Heavily
Funded the Discovery of COVID-19 Vaccines.”
125. Meagan C. Fitzpatrick et al., “Two Years of U.S. COVID-19
Vaccines Have Prevented Millions of Hospitalizations and
Deaths,” The Commonwealth Fund, December 13, 2022,
https://doi.org/10.26099/whsf-fp90; “World-Changing
mRNA Vaccines from Penn Medicine,” accessed July
29, 2024, https://www.pennmedicine.org/mrna; Arielle
D’Souza, “How To Reuse the Operation Warp Speed
Model,” Institute for Progress, February 7 , 2023, https://
ifp.org/how-to-reuse-the-operation-warp-speed-model.
126. Emily Capra et al., “What Early-Stage Investing Reveals
About Biotech Innovation,” McKinsey & Company, De-
cember 12, 2023, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/
life-sciences/our-insights/what-early-stage-investing-re-
veals-about-biotech-innovation.
127 . “Life Sciences Perspectives: IPO Tracker,” Goodwin,
accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.lifesciencesperspec-
tives.com/ipo-tracker.
128. “S&P Biotechnology Select Industry Index,” S&P Global,
accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.spglobal.com/spdji/
en/indices/equity/sp-biotechnology-select-industry-in-
dex.
129. Gwendolyn Wu, “As Biotech Recovers, Venture Firms’
Preferences Appear to Shift,” Biopharma Dive, June 6,
2024, https://www.biopharmadive.com/news/bio-2024-
venture-funding-biotech-ipos/718119; Angela Gabriel,
“Early-Stage Biotechs Now Tying CEO Pay Packages to
Capital Raises,” BioSpace, May 29, 2024, https://www.
biospace.com/early-stage-biotechs-now-tying-ceo-pay-
packages-to-capital-raises; Gabrielle Masson, “Biopharma
VC Activity Slipped Last Year—but ‘Buoyant’ Molecular
Glue Market Holds Hope: PitchBook,” Fierce Biotech,
March 5, 2024, https://www.fiercebiotech.com/biotech/
biopharma-vc-slips-last-years-q4-and-where-investors-
are-likely-place-future-bets-pitchbook.
130. Joseph Golec and John A. Vernon, “Financial Risk of
the Biotech Industry Versus the Pharmaceutical Indus-
try,” Applied Health Economics and Health Policy 7 , no. 3
(2009): 155–165, https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03256149.
131. Gwendolyn Wu, “Early-Stage Biotech Funding on Pace
to Drop 40% in 2023, HSBC Report Shows,” BioPharma
Dive, July 28, 2023, https://www.biopharmadive.com/
news/biotech-venture-capital-hsbc-report-norris/689313.
132. Capra et al., “What Early-Stage Investing Reveals About
Biotech Innovation.”
133. Capra et al., “What Early-Stage Investing Reveals About
Biotech Innovation.”
134. Capra et al., “What Early-Stage Investing Reveals About
Biotech Innovation.”
135. Muhammad Hammad Asif and Annie Sabater, “Biotech
Funding Rounds Rebound in Q2 2023, Still on Track
for a Down Year,” S&P Global, September 11, 2023,
https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/
news-insights/latest-news-headlines/biotech-funding-
rounds-rebound-in-q2-2023-still-on-track-for-a-down-
year-77409968.
136. “Top 20 Biotech Accelerators and Incubators,” Genet-
ic Engineering & Biotechnology News, December 7 ,
2022, https://www.genengnews.com/industry-news/
top-20-biotech-accelerators-and-incubators.
137 . Jules Adam, “The Top-Performing Countries in Biotech-
nology (According to the OECD),” Labiotech, February
12, 2024, https://www.labiotech.eu/best-biotech/top-bio-
tech-countries.
138. Adam, “The Top-Performing Countries in Biotechnology
(According to the OECD).”
139. Adam, “The Top-Performing Countries in Biotechnology
(According to the OECD).”
140. The industry association BIO defines the bioscience
sector to include (i) agricultural feedstock and industri-
al biosciences; (ii) bioscience-related distribution; (iii)
pharmaceuticals; (iv) medical devices and equipment; and
(v) research, testing, and medical laboratories. See “The
U.S. Bioscience Industry Fosters Innovation and Drives
America’s Economy Forward,” Biotechnology Innova-
tion Organization, 2022, https://www.bio.org/toolkit/
human-health/us-bioscience-industry-fosters-innova-
tion-and-drives-americas-economy-forward.
141. “The U.S. Bioscience Industry Fosters Innovation and
Drives America’s Economy Forward.”
142. “The U.S. Bioscience Industry Fosters Innovation and
Drives America’s Economy Forward.”
143. “U.S. Life Sciences Research Talent 2023: U.S. Life Sci-
ences Research Talent Trends,” accessed July 30, 2024,
https://www.cbre.com/insights/books/us-life-scienc-
es-research-talent-2023/us-life-sciences-research-talent-
trends.
144. The U .S. Biosciences Industry in the States: Best Practices in
Innovation, Partnerships, and Job Creation, Biotechnology
Innovation Organization and Council of State Biosci-

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
@CNASDC
70
ence Associations, June 2023, https://www.bio.org/sites/
default/files/2023-06/BIO_CSBA_Best_Practices_Re-
port_2023.pdf.
145. The U .S. Bioscience Industry: Fostering Innovation and
Driving America’s Economy Forward (Biotechnology Inno-
vation Organization, TEConomy Partners LLC, Council of
State Bioscience Associations, and Public Affairs Consul-
tants, 2022), https://www.bio.org/value-bioscience-inno-
vation-growing-jobs-and-improving-quality-life.
146. “FDA’s Regulation of Plant and Animal Biotechnology
Products,” U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Febru-
ary 22, 2024, https://www.fda.gov/safety/fdas-regula-
tion-plant-and-animal-biotechnology-products; “Regu-
lation of Biotechnology under TSCA and FIFRA,” United
States Environmental Protection Agency, June 5, 2015,
https://www.epa.gov/regulation-biotechnology-under-ts-
ca-and-fifra.
14 7. Nazish Jeffery, “What’s Next for the U.S. Bioeconomy?
Defining It,” Federation of American Scientists, June 22,
2023, https://fas.org/publication/whats-next-for-the-u-s-
bioeconomy-defining-it.
148. Jeffery, “What’s Next for the U.S. Bioeconomy?”
149. “What’s a Satellite Account?” Bureau of Economic Anal-
ysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, accessed September
20, 2024, https://www.bea.gov/system/files/2021-07/
whats-a-satellite-account-V6.pdf.
150. Tina Highfill and Matthew Chambers, Developing a
National Measure of the Economic Contributions of the Bio-
economy (Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department
of Commerce, March 2023), https://www.bea.gov/system/
files/papers/bea-bioeconomy-report.pdf.
151. Biden, “Executive Order on Advancing Biotechnology and
Biomanufacturing Innovation for a Sustainable, Safe, and
Secure American Bioeconomy.”
152. “NIST Bioeconomy Lexicon,” NIST, December 9, 2022,
https://www.nist.gov/bioscience/nist-bioeconomy-lexicon.
153. “Beyond Borders: EY Biotechnology Report 2024,” EY,
2024, https://www.ey.com/en_us/life-sciences/bio-
tech-outlook.
154. “Beyond Borders: EY Biotechnology Report 2024.”
155. “Beyond Borders: EY Biotechnology Report 2024.”
156. “Beyond Borders: EY Biotechnology Report 2024.”
157 . “Beyond Borders: EY Biotechnology Report 2024.”
158. Maira Imtiaz and Annie Sabater, “Private Equity Deal
Value in Biotechnology Drops by 32% in 2023,” S&P
Global, January 24, 2024, https://www.spglobal.com/mar-
ketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-headlines/
private-equity-deal-value-in-biotechnology-drops-by-32-
in-2023-80108512.
159. Jennifer Calfas, “Investors Flock Back to Biotech After a
Long, Cold Spell,” The Wall Street Journal, February 26,
2024, https://www.wsj.com/tech/biotech/biotech-com-
panies-investing-venture-capital-4869bc28.
160. “SPDR S&P Biotech ETF (XBI),” Yahoo Finance, accessed
November 12, 2024, https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/
XBI/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly-
93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=AQA-
AAN2yMr3AMo0B3Vx3ElgP3XlAUgXbougr0Q4u-68fz-
9T0fcnMLTdDSB0wG27cA2YS8FMtFXGOShE-
hev8skC4NgbEB3GdRwF3xVP7-jgvCruCKKiRJu-
J68GV1auuk57Qwm78-Ps_EOWRvS1bFZ7KUDXwCIX-
gncc-NUC-VCViDIB8nM.
161. The U .S. Bioscience Industry: Fostering Innovation and
Driving America’s Economy Forward.
162. The U .S. Bioscience Industry: Fostering Innovation and
Driving America’s Economy Forward.
163. Vivek Chilukuri and Sam Howell, “To Win the Tech
Race, America Needs High-Skilled Immigration Reform,”
Center for a New American Security, December 4, 2023,
https://www.cnas.org/publications/commentary/to-win-
the-tech-race-america-needs-high-skilled-immigration-
reform; David Jarvis, “Tech Talent Is Still Hard to Find,
Despite Layoffs in the Sector,” Deloitte, August 14, 2023,
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/tech-
nology/tech-talent-gap-and-skills-shortage-make-recruit-
ment-difficult.html.
164. Chilukuri and Howell, “To Win the Tech Race, America
Needs High-Skilled Immigration Reform”; Jarvis, “Tech
Talent Is Still Hard to Find, Despite Layoffs in the Sector.”
165. Safeguarding the Bioeconomy, chap. 8.
166. Building the Bioworkforce of the Future: Expanding Equi-
table Pathways into Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing
Jobs (The White House, June 2023, https://www.white-
house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Building-the-
Bioworkforce-of-the-Future.pdf.
1 6 7. “Occupational Outlook Handbook: Biological Techni-
cians,” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, August 29, 2024,
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/life-physical-and-social-sci-
ence/biological-technicians.htm.
168. Building the Bioworkforce of the Future: Expanding Equi-
table Pathways into Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing
Jobs.
169. “Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Universities: 2022,”
National Science Foundation, September 28, 2023, https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf24300.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
71
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
170. “Doctorate Recipients from U.S. Universities: 2022.”
171. Chilukuri and Howell, “To Win the Tech Race, America
Needs High-Skilled Immigration Reform.”
172. Michelle Holko, “Biotech Matters: Great Data Competi-
tion and Interoperability with Allies and Partners,” Center
for a New American Security, April 2, 2024, https://www.
cnas.org/publications/reports/biotech-matters-great-da-
ta-competition-and-interoperability-with-allies-and-part-
ners.
173. Holko, “Biotech Matters: Great Data Competition and
Interoperability with Allies and Partners.”
174. Arati Prabhakar et al., Vision, Needs, and Proposed
Actions for Data for the Bioeconomy Initiative (Interagen-
cy Working Group on Data for the Bioeconomy of the
National Science and Technology Council, December
2023), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/up-
loads/2023/12/FINAL-Data-for-the-Bioeconomy-Initia-
tive-Report.pdf.
175. Arati Prabhakar et al., Vision, Needs, and Proposed Actions
for Data for the Bioeconomy Initiative.
176. Antonio Regalado, “More Than 26 Million People Have
Taken an at-Home Ancestry Test,” MIT Technology Re-
view, February 11, 2019, https://www.technologyreview.
com/2019/02/11/103446/more-than-26-million-people-
have-taken-an-at-home-ancestry-test.
177 . Holko, “Biotech Matters: Great Data Competition and
Interoperability with Allies and Partners.”
178. Holko, “Biotech Matters: Great Data Competition and
Interoperability with Allies and Partners.”
179. “All of Us – Opportunities for Researchers,” National In-
stitutes of Health, accessed September 22, 2024, https://
allofus.nih.gov/get-involved/opportunities-researchers#-
Fundingopportunities.
180. “GDC Overview,” National Cancer Institute, Genomic
Data Commons, accessed September 22, 2024, https://
gdc.cancer.gov/about-gdc/gdc-overview.
181. “Million Veteran Program (MVP),” U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs, Office of Research & Development,
accessed August 29, 2024, https://www.research.va.gov/
mvp.
182. “Million Veteran Program (MVP).”
183. “Expanding Public Access to Agricultural Informa-
tion,” Agricultural Research Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, August 11, 2021, https://www.ars.usda.gov/
research/annual-report-on-science-accomplishments/
fy-2020/expanding-public-access-to-agricultural-infor-
mation.
184. Alondra Nelson, “Ensuring Free, Immediate, and Equita-
ble Access to Federally Funded Research,” memorandum
for the heads of executive departments and agencies,
Office of Science and Technology Policy, August 25,
2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/up-
loads/2022/08/08-2022-OSTP-Public-Access-Memo.pdf.
185. Mark D. Wilkinson, et al., “The FAIR Guiding Principles
for scientific data management and stewardship,” Nature,
March 15, 2016, https://www.nature.com/articles/sda-
ta201618.
186. Arati Prabhakar et al., Vision, Needs, and Proposed Actions
for Data for the Bioeconomy Initiative.
187 . Kuntz, “Biotech Matters: Problems with Life Science
Databases in the United States.”
188. Barabara J. Evans and Gail P . Jarvik, “Impact of HIPAA’s
Minimum Necessary Standard on Genomic Data Sharing,”
PMC PubMed Central, September 14, 2017 , https://pmc.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5851792.
189. Joseph R. Biden Jr., “Executive Order on Preventing
Access to Americans’ Bulk Sensitive Personal Data
and United States Government-Related Data by Coun-
tries of Concern,” The White House, February 28,
2024, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
presidential-actions/2024/02/28/executive-or-
der-on-preventing-access-to-americans-bulk-sensi-
tive-personal-data-and-united-states-government-re-
lated-data-by-countries-of-concern; “FACT SHEET:
President Biden Issues Executive Order to Protect
Americans’ Sensitive Personal Data,” The White
House, February 28, 2024, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2024/02/28/
fact-sheet-president-biden-issues-sweeping-execu-
tive-order-to-protect-americans-sensitive-personal-data.
190. Arati Prabhakar et al., Vision, Needs, and Proposed Actions
for Data for the Bioeconomy Initiative.
191. Arati Prabhakar et al., Vision, Needs, and Proposed Actions
for Data for the Bioeconomy Initiative.
192. “Major Declines in the Public’s Confidence in Science in
the Wake of the Pandemic,” AP-NORC Center, June 15,
2023, https://apnorc.org/projects/major-declines-in-the-
publics-confidence-in-science-in-the-wake-of-the-pan-
demic.
193. “Major Declines in the Public’s Confidence in Science in
the Wake of the Pandemic.”
194. “Major Declines in the Public’s Confidence in Science in
the Wake of the Pandemic.”
195. Daniel A. Cox et al., “America’s Crisis of Confidence: Ris-
ing Mistrust, Conspiracies, and Vaccine Hesitancy After
COVID-19,” Survey Center on American Life, September
28, 2023, https://www.americansurveycenter.org/re-

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
@CNASDC
72
search/americas-crisis-of-confidence-rising-mistrust-con-
spiracies-and-vaccine-hesitancy-after-covid-19.
196. Cox et al., “America’s Crisis of Confidence: Rising Mistrust,
Conspiracies, and Vaccine Hesitancy After COVID-19.”
197 . “Public and Scientists’ Views on Science and Society,” Pew
Research Center, January 29, 2015, https://www.pewre-
search.org/science/2015/01/29/public-and-scientists-
views-on-science-and-society-2.
198. Brian Kennedy and Cary Lynne Thigpen, “Many Pub-
lics Around World Doubt Safety of Genetically Modified
Foods,” Pew Research Center, November 11, 2020, https://
www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2020/11/11/many-pub-
lics-around-world-doubt-safety-of-genetically-modi-
fied-foods.
199. Gustavo Guerra et al., Selected Issues in Biotechnology Reg-
ulation: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, England,
European Union, Germany, India, Japan, Mexico, New
Zealand, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan (The
Law Library of Congress, Global Legal Research Director-
ate, November 2023), https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/
service/ll/llglrd/2023555931/2023555931.pdf.
200. Guerra et al., Selected Issues in Biotechnology Regulation:
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, England, Euro-
pean Union, Germany, India, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand,
Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan.
201. “Biological Weapons,” United Nations Office for Disarma-
ment Affairs, accessed July 29, 2024, https://disarmament.
unoda.org/biological-weapons.
202. “The Convention on Biological Diversity,” Secretariat of
the Convention on Biological Diversity, October 10, 2024,
https://www.cbd.int/convention.
203. “The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety,” Secretariat of the
Convention on Biological Diversity, accessed October 10,
2024, https://bch.cbd.int/protocol.
204. “The Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing,”
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, Oc-
tober 25, 2024, https://www.cbd.int/abs/default.shtml.
205. “International Declaration on Human Genetic Data,”
UNESCO, 2004, https://www.unesco.org/en/ethics-sci-
ence-technology/human-genetic-data; “Universal Declara-
tion on the Human Genome and Human Rights,” UNESCO,
November 11, 1997 , https://www.unesco.org/en/ethics-sci-
ence-technology/human-genome-and-human-rights.
206. “Global Guidance Framework for the Responsible Use
of the Life Sciences: Mitigating Biorisks and Governing
Dual-Use Research,” World Health Organization, Sep-
tember 13, 2022, https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789240056107.
207 . “About Us,” Global Alliance for Genomics & Health, ac-
cessed July 29, 2024, https://www.ga4gh.org/about-us.
208. “iGEM: The Heart of Synthetic Biology,” iGEM, ac-
cessed July 29, 2024, https://igem.org.
209. “BRICS Meeting Deliberated on Emerging Issues in
Biotechnology and Biomedicine,” Ministry of Science
and Technology, Press Information Bureau Delhi, May
27 , 2021, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx-
?PRID=1722175.
210. “Bolstering ASEAN Food Security through Partner-
ship and Cooperation on Agricultural Biotechnology,”
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, March 6,
2024, https://asean.org/bolstering-asean-food-securi-
ty-through-partnership-and-cooperation-on-agricultur-
al-biotechnology-2.
211. “Australia-Singapore Digital Economy Agreement,”
Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.dfat.gov.
au/trade/services-and-digital-trade/australia-and-sin-
gapore-digital-economy-agreement.
212. “Final Report Summary - EC-US TF (20th Anniversary
of the EC-US Task Force on Biotechnology Research),”
European Commission, January 18, 2013, https://cordis.
europa.eu/project/id/266762/reporting.
213. “U.S.-EU Joint Statement of the Trade and Technology
Council,” The White House, April 5, 2024, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releas-
es/2024/04/05/u-s-eu-joint-statement-of-the-trade-
and-technology-council-3.
214. “NATO Releases First International Strategy on Biotech-
nology and Human Enhancement Technologies,” North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), April 12, 2024,
https://www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/news_222980.
htm.
215. “Defence Innovation Accelerator for the North Atlantic
(DIANA),” NATO, July 5, 2024, https://www.nato.int/
cps/en/natohq/topics_216199.htm.
216. “Nato Innovation Fund,” NATO Innovation Fund, ac-
cessed July 29, 2024, https://www.nif.fun.
217 . “DIANA,” DIANA, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.
diana.nato.int/about-diana.html; “Summary of NATO’s
Biotechnology and Human Enhancement Technologies
Strategy,” NATO, April 16, 2024, https://www.nato.int/
cps/en/natohq/official_texts_224669.htm.
218. “AUKUS: The Trilateral Security Partnership Between
Australia, U.K. and U.S.,” U.S. Department of Defense,
accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.defense.gov/Spot-
lights/AUKUS.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
73
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
219. “Overview,” Quad Investors Network, accessed July 29,
2024, https://quadinvestorsnetwork.org.
220. Lisa Curtis, Evan Wright, and Hannah Kelley, Forging a
New Era of U .S.-Japan-South Korea Trilateral Cooperation:
The Key to a Stable, Secure Indo-Pacific, Center for a New
American Security, March 21, 2024, https://www.cnas.
org/publications/reports/forging-a-new-era-of-u-s-japan-
south-korea-trilateral-cooperation.
221. “Fact Sheet: Biden-Harris Administration’s Actions
to Advance American Biotechnology and Biomanu-
facturing,” The White House, June 25, 2024, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2024/06/25/
fact-sheet-biden-harris-administrations-actions-to-ad-
vance-american-biotechnology-and-biomanufacturing.
222. Thomas Dietz et al., “Governance of the Bioeconomy: A
Global Comparative Study of National Bioeconomy Strat-
egies,” Sustainability 10, no. 9 (September 6, 2018): 3190,
https://doi.org/10.3390/su10093190.
223. “BBI JU - Bio-Based Industries Joint Undertaking,”
European Commission, January 13, 2023, https://knowl-
edge4policy.ec.europa.eu/organisation/bbi-ju-bio-based-
industries-joint-undertaking_en.
224. “France Pledges €7 Billion to Spearhead Healthcare In-
novation by 2030,” Brief News, May 4, 2024, https://www.
brief.news/france-news/2024/05/03/frances-health-
care-innovation-pledge.
225. “Catapult Network,” Catapult Network, accessed July 29,
2024, https://catapult.org.uk.
226. “Building the Future with Nature: Boosting Biotechnology
and Biomanufacturing in the EU,” European Commission,
March 20, 2024, https://research-and-innovation.ec.eu-
ropa.eu/document/download/47554adc-dffc-411b-8cd6-
b52417514cb3_en.
22 7. “Building the Future with Nature: Boosting Biotechnology
and Biomanufacturing in the EU.”
228. Innovating for Sustainable Growth: A Bioeconomy for Eu-
rope (Brussels: European Commission, Directorate-Gener-
al for Research and Innovation, 2012), https://data.europa.
eu/doi/10.2777/6462.
229. Review of the 2012 European Bioeconomy Strategy (Brus-
sels: European Commission, Directorate-General for
Research and Innovation, 2018), https://data.europa.eu/
doi/10.2777/086770.
230. “Horizon 2020,” European Commission, accessed July 29,
2024, https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/fund-
ing/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-
open-calls/horizon-2020_en.
231. Garance Breuil et al., Horizon Europe support for the Euro-
pean Green Deal, European Parliament, Directorate-Gen-
eral for Parliamentary Research Services, 2024, https://
data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/683027.
232. “Bio-Based Industries Joint Undertaking - Deployment
Support Measures,” ETIP Bioenergy, accessed July 29,
2024, https://www.etipbioenergy.eu/databases/deploy-
ment/14-bio-based-industries-joint-undertaking.
233. “Circular Bio-Based Europe Joint Undertaking (CBE
JU),” European Union, accessed July 29, 2024, https://eu-
ropean-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institu-
tions-and-bodies/search-all-eu-institutions-and-bodies/
circular-bio-based-europe-joint-undertaking-cbe-ju_en.
234. “Industrial Polymers Now Sustainably Made from Lignin,”
Circular Bio-Based Europe Joint Undertaking (CBE JU),
March 1, 2022, https://www.cbe.europa.eu/achievements/
industrial-polymers-now-sustainably-made-lignin; “Meet
Nature’s Plastic Eaters,” Circular Bio-Based Europe Joint
Undertaking, January 20, 2022, https://www.cbe.europa.
eu/achievements/meet-natures-plastic-eaters.
235. “Building the Future with Nature: Boosting Biotechnology
and Biomanufacturing in EU.”
236. “Building the Future with Nature: Boosting Biotechnology
and Biomanufacturing in EU.”
237 . Francesca Lagioia and Giovanni Sartor, The Impact of the
General Data Protection Regulation on Artificial Intelli-
gence (Directorate General for Parliamentary Research
Services, European Parliament, June 2020), https://data.
europa.eu/doi/10.2861/293.
238. Adam, “The Top-Performing Countries in Biotechnology
(According to the OECD).”
239. “Biotechnology,” Business Belgium, accessed July 29,
2024, https://business.belgium.be/en/investing_in_bel-
gium/key_sectors/biotechnology.
240. “Biotechnology”; “Population Projections,” Eurostat,
accessed July 29, 2024, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
databrowser/view/tps00002/default/table?lang=en&cate-
gory=t_proj.
241. “Belgium Pavilion,” BIO International Convention, Bio-
technology Innovation Organization (BIO), accessed July
29, 2024, https://www.bio.org/events/bio-internation-
al-convention/exhibitor-directory/00186040.
242. Louise Haynes, “The Long Read: Belgium – One of a
Kind,” PharmaBoardroom, September 12, 2024, https://
pharmaboardroom.com/articles/the-long-read-belgium-
one-of-a-kind.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
@CNASDC
74
243. “Belgium – Country Commercial Guide: Biopharmaceu-
ticals,” International Trade Administration, U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, January 11, 2024, https://www.trade.
gov/country-commercial-guides/belgium-biopharmaceu-
ticals-0.
244. Nick Amies, “Belgium’s Biotech Patent Surge Sets Global
Innovation Benchmark,” The Brussels Times, March
24, 2024, https://www.brusselstimes.com/975287/
belgiums-biotech-patent-surge-sets-global-innova-
tion-benchmark.
245. Adam, “The Top-Performing Countries in Biotechnology
(According to the OECD).”
246. Jules Adam, “Biotech in France: What’s Holding Back
Progress and How to Move Forward?” Labiotech, March
21, 2024, https://www.labiotech.eu/in-depth/france-bio-
tech-scene.
247 . “DNA Script Announces the Commercial Launch of
the SYNTAX System, the First Benchtop DNA Printer
Powered by Enzymatic Synthesis, to Accelerate Molecu-
lar Biology and Genomics Workflows,” DNA Script, June
15, 2021, https://www.dnascript.com/press-releases/
dna-script-announces-the-commercial-launch-of-the-
syntax-system-the-first-benchtop-dna-printer-powered-
by-enzymatic-synthesis-to-accelerate-molecular-biolo-
gy-and-genomics-workflows.
248. Keown, “France Aims to Become European Leader in Life
Sciences Innovation.”
249. “French Biotech: A Fast-Growing Industry,” BioPharm In-
ternational 17 , no. 9 (September 1, 2004), https://www.bio-
pharminternational.com/view/french-biotech-fast-grow-
ing-industry.
250. Adam, “Biotech in France: What’s Holding Back Progress
and How to Move Forward?”
251. “Switzerland Ranking in the Global Innovation Index
2024,” World Intellectual Property Organization, accessed
July 29, 2024, https://www.wipo.int/gii-ranking/en/swit-
zerland.
252. Lu Rahman, “Drug Discovery World | Switzerland as
a Global Biotech Hub,” BioAlps, July 12, 2021, https://
bioalps.org/switzerland-continues-to-punch-above-its-
weight-as-global-biotech-hub; “Swiss Biotech Report
2024 Shows Sector Performing Well in 2023 by Con-
tinuing to Embrace International Alliances,” EY, April
23, 2024, https://www.ey.com/en_ch/news/2024/04/
swiss-biotech-report-2024-shows-sector-perform-
ing-well-in-2023-by-continuing-to-embrace-internation-
al-alliances.
253. Christian Moser Nikles and David Rees, “Switzerland’s
Ability to Attract International Partners Continues to
Strengthen Its Role as a Global Hub for Biotech Inventions,”
Swiss Biotech, April 23, 2024, https://www.swissbiotech.
org/listing/biotech-report-2024-switzerlands-ability-to-
attract-international-partners-continues-to-strengthen-its-
role-as-a-global-hub-for-biotech-inventions.
254. Adam, “The Top-Performing Countries in Biotechnology
(According to the OECD).”
255. “Roche and Novartis Among Global Leaders for Research
Spending,” Basel Area, May 5, 2023, https://baselarea.
swiss/blog-post/roche-and-novartis-among-global-lead-
ers-for-research-spending.
256. Mayank Bhandari et al., “The UK Biotech Sector: The
Path to Global Leadership,” McKinsey & Company, De-
cember 3, 2021, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/
life-sciences/our-insights/the-uk-biotech-sector-the-
path-to-global-leadership.
257 . “World University Rankings 2022,” Times Higher Edu-
cation, 2022, https://www.timeshighereducation.com/
world-university-rankings/2022/world-ranking.
258. “Best Global Universities for Biotechnology and Applied
Microbiology.”
259. “Cambridge Biomedical Campus Celebrates 60 Years with
£2bn Boost to UK Economy,” University of Cambridge,
September 2, 2022, https://www.cam.ac.uk/research/
news/cambridge-biomedical-campus-celebrates-60-
years-with-ps2bn-boost-to-uk-economy.
260. “The Golden Triangle in 2024,” nufuture, accessed July
29, 2024, https://www.nufuture.co.uk/blog/view/199/
the-golden-triangle-in-2024.
261. Bhandari et al., “The UK Biotech Sector: The Path to
Global Leadership.”
262. Bhandari et al., “The UK Biotech Sector: The Path to
Global Leadership.”
263. Bhandari et al., “The UK Biotech Sector: The Path to
Global Leadership.”
264. Bhandari et al., “The UK Biotech Sector: The Path to
Global Leadership.”
265. Bhandari et al., “The UK Biotech Sector: The Path to
Global Leadership.”
266. “Chancellor Reveals Life Sciences Growth Package to
Fire up Economy,” UK government, May 26, 2023, https://
www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-reveals-life-
sciences-growth-package-to-fire-up-economy.
267 . Adam Bradshaw et al., “A New National Purpose: Leading
the Biotech Revolution,” Tony Blair Institute for Global
Change, January 25, 2024, https://www.institute.global/
insights/politics-and-governance/a-new-national-pur-
pose-leading-the-biotech-revolution.

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
75
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
268. Christine Bloor et al., Strategy for UK Life Sciences (Office
for Life Sciences and Department for Business Innovation
and Skills, December 2011), https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/media/5a79762fe5274a2acd18d0b7/11-1429
-strategy-for-uk-life-sciences.pdf.
269. Bradshaw et al., “A New National Purpose: Leading the
Biotech Revolution.”
270. “Learn More About UK Biobank,” UK Biobank, August
13, 2024, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.ukbiobank.
ac.uk/learn-more-about-uk-biobank.
271. “Origins,” Genomics England, accessed July 29, 2024,
https://www.genomicsengland.co.uk/about-us/origins.
272. “Origins.”
273. Life Sciences Vision (UK government, 2021),
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/me-
dia/612763b4e90e0705437230c3/life-sciences-vi-
sion-2021.pdf.
274. “Catapult Network.”
275. Bradshaw et al., “A New National Purpose: Leading the
Biotech Revolution.”
276. National Vision for Engineering Biology (UK government,
December 5, 2023), https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/national-vision-for-engineering-biology/na-
tional-vision-for-engineering-biology.
277 . National Vision for Engineering Biology.
278. “Chancellor Reveals Life Sciences Growth Package to Fire
up Economy.”
279. “Chancellor Reveals Life Sciences Growth Package to Fire
up Economy.”
280. The UK Science and Technology Framework: Update
on Progress (UK government, 9 February, 2024),
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-sci-
ence-and-technology-framework/the-uk-science-and-
technology-framework-update-on-progress-9-febru-
ary-2024.
281. “New £100m Fund Will Unlock the Potential of
Engineering Biology,” UK Research and Innova-
tion, February 9, 2024, https://www.ukri.org/news/
new-100m-fund-will-unlock-the-potential-of-engineer-
ing-biology.
282. “New £100m Fund Will Unlock the Potential of Engineer-
ing Biology.”
283. Martin Muhleisen and Hamid Faruqee, “ Japan: Population
Aging and the Fiscal Challenge,” Finance & Development
38, no. 1, (2001) https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/
ft/fandd/2001/03/muhleise.htm; “Biotechnology,” EU
Business in Japan, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.
eu-japan.eu/eubusinessinjapan/sectors/biotechnology.
284. Adam, “ Japan’s Ten Hottest Biotech Companies in Health-
care.”
285. Willow Shah-Neville, “10 Biotech Companies Leading
Innovation in the Asia-Pacific Region,” Labiotech, No-
vember 14, 2023, https://www.labiotech.eu/best-biotech/
asia-pacific-companies.
286. Adam, “ Japan’s Ten Hottest Biotech Companies in Health-
care.”
287 . “Bioinformatics,” EU Business in Japan, May 2022,
https://www.eu-japan.eu/eubusinessinjapan/sectors/bio-
technology/bioinformatics.
288. Rolf Schmid, “Report: Latest Trends in Biotechnology
Research in Japan,” EU-Japan Centre for Industrial
Cooperation, accessed September 22, 2024, https://www.
eu-japan.eu/eubusinessinjapan/library/publication/re-
port-latest-trends-biotechnology-research-japan.
289. David Wild, “ Japan’s Biotech Ecosystem Could Be Headed
For An Upswing,” In Vivo, May 28, 2024, http://invivo.
citeline.com/IV154631/Japans-Biotech-Ecosystem-
Could-Be-Headed-For-An-Upswing.
290. Wild, “ Japan’s Biotech Ecosystem Could Be Headed For
An Upswing.”
291. “ Japan Bioeconomy Strategy,” EU-Japan Centre for
Industrial Cooperation, accessed July 29, 2024, https://
www.eu-japan.eu/news/japan-bioeconomy-strategy;
Yoshiaki Tsukamoto, An Overview of Japan’s Bioeconomy
Strategy and Greater Tokyo Biocommunity (Greater Tokyo
Biocommunity, 2023), https://gtb.jba.or.jp/wp-content/
uploads/2023/06/n19b0d7c51a31_4d217e39a633ea-
1627b2e2fdcad8fba5.pdf.
292. Tsukamoto, An Overview of Japan’s Bioeconomy Strategy
and Greater Tokyo Biocommunity.
293. “Investing in People for a New Form of Capitalism,”
KIZUNA, July 28, 2022, https://www.japan.go.jp/kizu-
na/2022/07/investing_in_people.html.
294. “Bio,” Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, accessed
July 29, 2024, https://www.meti.go.jp/english/policy/
mono_info_service/mono/bio/index.html.
295. “Startup Development Five- Year Plan,” section 10 of chap.
3 in JETRO Invest Japan Report 2023, Japan External
Trade Organization (JETRO), 2023, https://www.jetro.go.
jp/en/invest/investment_environment/ijre/report2023/
ch3/sec10.html.
296. Adam, “ Japan’s Ten Hottest Biotech Companies in Health-
care.”

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
@CNASDC
76
297 . Wild, “ Japan’s Biotech Ecosystem Could Be Headed For
An Upswing.”
298. Alan Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea
2023 (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, July 31, 2023), https://www.oecd.org/en/
publications/2023/07/oecd-reviews-of-innovation-poli-
cy-korea-2023_6517d469.html.
299. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
300. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
301. “KAIST,” KAIST, accessed July 30, 2024, https://www.
kaist.ac.kr/en; “The Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics,” The Institute of Molecular Biology and Genet-
ics, accessed July 30, 2024, https://imbg.snu.ac.kr/en.
302. “Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnol-
ogy (KRIBB),” accessed July 30, 2024, https://www.nst.
re.kr/eng/contents.do?key=158.
303. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
304. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
305. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
306. “Samsung BioLogics: A World Leader in Biopharmaceuti-
cal Manufacturing,” Fierce Pharma, May 20, 2019, https://
www.fiercepharma.com/sponsored/samsung-biolog-
ics-a-world-leader-biopharmaceutical-manufacturing.
307 . “LG Chem,” LG Chem, accessed July 30, 2024, https://
www.lgchem.com/main/index.
308. “SK Bioscience to Expand Vaccine Manufacturing Plant in
South Korea,” Pharmaceutical Technology, March 8, 2024,
https://www.pharmaceutical-technology.com/news/
sk-bioscience-vaccine-manufacturing-plant.
309. Sayuri Umeda, “South Korea: Act to Promote Green
Bio Industry Published,” Library of Congress, February
28, 2024, https://www.loc.gov/item/global-legal-moni-
tor/2024-02-07/south-korea-act-to-promote-green-bio-
industry-published.
310. Choi Moon-hee, “Korean Government Comes up with
Bio-Health Industry Innovation Strategy,” BusinessKorea,
May 23, 2019, https://www.businesskorea.co.kr/news/ar-
ticleView.html?idxno=32128.
311. Moon-hee, “Korean Government Comes up with Bio-
Health Industry Innovation Strategy.”
312. “Korea to Announce the National Synthetic Biolo-
gy Initiative,” Ministry of Science and ICT, Novem-
ber 29, 2022, https://www.msit.go.kr/eng/bbs/view.
do?sCode=eng&mId=4&mPid=2&pageIndex=13&bbsSe-
qNo=42&nttSeqNo=758&searchOpt=ALL&searchTxt=.
313. “Korea to Announce the National Synthetic Biology Initia-
tive.”
314. “Leap to Global Top 3 in AI—Semiconductor, Advanced
Biotechnology & Quantum Technology,” Office of the
President, Republic of Korea, April 26, 2024, https://eng.
president.go.kr/briefing/yKPaTKzX.
315. Klaus Schwab, ed., The Global Competitiveness Report:
2019 (World Economic Forum, 2019), https://www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalCompetitivenessRe-
port2019.pdf.
316. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
317 . Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
318. Paic et al., OECD Reviews of Innovation Policy: Korea 2023.
319. Anthony Bartzokas, Country Review Korea (Maastricht,
Netherlands: UNU-MERIT, 2008), https://ec.europa.eu/
invest-in-research/pdf/download_en/korea.pdf.
320. Hui Yongzheng, “China’s High-Tech Successes,” The
Bridge 28, no. 2, (June 1, 1998), https://nae.edu/7605/Chi-
nasHigh-TechSuccesses.
321. “Six Chinese Nationals Indicted for Conspiring to Steal
Trade Secrets from U.S. Seed Companies,” Federal Bureau
of Investigation, December 19, 2013, https://archives.fbi.
gov/archives/omaha/press-releases/2013/six-chinese-
nationals-indicted-for-conspiring-to-steal-trade-secrets-
from-u.s.-seed-companies.
322. Mark Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Develop-
ment: The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement (Gry-
phon Scientific, February 14, 2019), https://www.uscc.gov/
sites/default/files/Research/US-Chinapercent20Biotech-
percent20Report.pdf.
323. Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI: How
China’s Hybrid Economy Skews Competition.
324. “2021 Research Leaders: Leading institutions in biological
sciences,” Nature Index, accessed July 31, 2024, https://
www.nature.com/nature-index/research-leaders/2021/
institution/all/biological-sciences/global.
325. Jeffrey Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact
the Global Biopharma Industry, (McKinsey & Company,
August 2022), https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mck-
insey/industries/life sciences/our insights/vision 2028
how china could impact the global biopharma industry/
vision-2028-how-china-could-impact-the-global-biophar-
ma-industry.pdf.
326. Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.
327 . Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.
328. Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
77
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
329. Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.
330. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
331. “Outlook on Biopharma Innovation Trends in China,”
Deloitte China, accessed July 31, 2024, https://www2.
deloitte.com/cn/en/pages/life-sciences-and-healthcare/
articles/china-biopharma-innovation-trends.html.
332. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
333. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
334. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
335. Dudley, “The Chinese API Market.”
336. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
337 . Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
338. John Wong et al., “Competing in China’s Booming Bio-
pharma Market,” BCG Global, November 12, 2020, https://
www.bcg.com/publications/2020/competing-in-chi-
nas-biopharma-market.
339. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
340. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
341. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
342. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
343. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
344. Miao Lu and Wang Huiyao, “China Still Leading Source
of Foreign Students,” China Daily, March 16, 2024,
https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202403/16/WS65f4e-
78ba31082fc043bcf71.html.
345. “Reverse Brain Drain? Exploring Trends Among Chi-
nese Scientists in the U.S.,” Stanford Center on China’s
Economy and Institutions, July 15, 2024, https://sccei.fsi.
stanford.edu/china-briefs/reverse-brain-drain-exploring-
trends-among-chinese-scientists-us.
346. “2024 Grand Jamboree,” iGEM, accessed July 29, 2024,
https://jamboree.igem.org.
347 . “Sponsors,” JiangnanU_China, accessed July 29, 2024,
https://2019.igem.org/Team:JiangnanU_China/Sponsors.
348. “China’s Long History of Biotechnology,” chap. 2 in Bio-
technology in China, ed. Dean H. Hamer and Shain-dow
Kung (National Academies Press, 1989), https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK236111.
349. Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI.
350. Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI.
351. Patrick Beyrer, “Taking Stock of U.S.-China Biotech-
nology Competition,” Asia Society Policy Institute, May
15, 2024, https://asiasociety.org/policy-institute/tak-
ing-stock-us-china-biotechnology-competition.
352. “Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five- Year
Plan for National Economic and Social Development and
Long-Range Objectives for 2035,” Center for Security and
Emerging Technology, May 13, 2021, https://cset.george-
town.edu/publication/china-14th-five-year-plan.
353. “Outline of the People’s Republic of China 14th Five- Year
Plan for National Economic and Social Development and
Long-Range Objectives for 2035.”
354. “Notice of the State Council on the Publication of ‘Made
in China 2025,’” Center for Security and Emerging Tech-
nology, March 10, 2022, https://cset.georgetown.edu/pub-
lication/notice-of-the-state-council-on-the-publication-
of-made-in-china-2025.
355. Caroline Schuerger, Vikram Venkatram, and Katherine
Quinn, China and Medical AI: Implication of Big Biodata
for the Bioeconomy, Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, May 2024, https://cset.georgetown.edu/pub-
lication/china-and-medical-ai.
356. Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI; Ka-
zmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development: The
Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
357 . Wenyan Sun, Kedong Yin, and Zhe Liu, “Tax Incentives,
R&D Manipulation, and Corporate Innovation Perfor-
mance: Evidence from Listed Companies in China.”
Sustainability 13, no. 21 (October 2021): 11819, https://doi.
org/10.3390/su132111819.
358. Kenji Kawase, “‘Made in China 2025’ Thrives with Sub-
sidies for Tech, EV Makers,” Nikkei Asia, July 22, 2022,
https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Business-Spotlight/
Made-in-China-2025-thrives-with-subsidies-for-tech-EV-
makers.
359. “How Biopharma Can Leverage China’s Biotech Park
Ecosystem for Success,” Deloitte China, May 6, 2021,
https://www2.deloitte.com/cn/en/pages/life-scienc-
es-and-healthcare/articles/pr-china-biotech-parks-lever-
aging-the-ecosystem-for-success.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
@CNASDC
78
360. “How Biopharma Can Leverage China’s Biotech Park
Ecosystem for Success.”
361. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
362. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
363. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
364. “MARA Issues First Ever Gene-Editing Guidelines,”
USDA Foreign Agriculture Service, January 28, 2022,
https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/Report/
DownloadReportByFileName?fileName=MARAper-
cent20Issuespercent20Firstpercent20Everpercent-
20Gene-Editingpercent20Guidelines_Beijing_Chinaper-
cent20-percent20Peoplepercent27spercent20Repub-
licpercent20of_01-26-2022.pdf.
365. Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI.
366. Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI.
367 . Puglisi and Rask, China, Biotechnology, and BGI.
368. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
369. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
370. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
371. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
372. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
373. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
374. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
375. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
376. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
377 . Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
378. Schuerger, Venkatram, and Quinn, China and Medical AI:
Implication of Big Biodata for the Bioeconomy.
379. Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau and Antonia Hmaidi, Where
China Stands in the Global Race for Talent (Mercator
Institute for China Studies and Hinrich Foundation, April
2024), https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2024-04/
WPpercent20-percent20Wherepercent20chinapercent-
20standspercent20inpercent20thepercent20globalper-
cent20racepercent20forpercent20talentpercent20-pe-
rcent20MERICSpercent20-percent20final.pdf.
380. Joseph R. Biden Jr., “Executive Order on Addressing
United States Investments in Certain National Security
Technologies and Products in Countries of Concern,” The
White House, August 9, 2023, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2023/08/09/
executive-order-on-addressing-united-states-in-
vestments-in-certain-national-security-technolo-
gies-and-products-in-countries-of-concern.
381. Eleanor Olcott and Wang Xueqiao, “How China Has
‘Throttled’ Its Private Sector,” Financial Times, September
12, 2024, https://www.ft.com/content/1e9e7544-974c-
4662-a901-d30c4ab56eb7.
382. Olcott and Xueqiao, “How China Has ‘Throttled’ Its Pri-
vate Sector.”
383. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
384. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
385. Kazmierczak et al., China’s Biotechnology Development:
The Role of US and Other Foreign Engagement.
386. Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.
387 . Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
388. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
389. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
390. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
391. Algazy et al., Vision 2028: How China Could Impact the
Global Biopharma Industry.
392. Gaida et al., ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker.
393. “Qualifying Advanced Energy Project Credit Program,”
U.S. Department of Energy, accessed September 23, 2024,
https://eco.energy.gov/48C/s.
394. “Chancellor Reveals Life Sciences Growth Package to Fire
up Economy.”
395. “What is the BioPreferred Program?”
396. “What is the BioPreferred Program?”

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
79
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
397 . “BioMADE: Revitalizing U.S. Biomanufacturing and Fos-
tering Collaboration.”
398. “BioMADE Celebrates 3 Years!” BioMADE, accessed
September 22, 2024, https://www.biomade.org/news/bio-
made-celebrates-3-years.
399. “Fast-41 Fact Sheet,” Permitting Dashboard, Federal
Infrastructure Projects, September 13, 2022, https://www.
permits.performance.gov/documentation/fast-41-fact-
sheet.
400. “From Bio-Concept to Bioproduct,” Advanced Biofuels
and Bioproducts Process Development Unit, accessed
September 23, 2024, https://abpdu.lbl.gov.
401. “Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence for Science, Security
and Technology (FASST),” U.S. Department of Energy,
Office of Critical and Emerging Technologies, accessed
September 23, 2024, https://www.energy.gov/fasst.
402. “Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence for Science, Security
and Technology (FASST).”
403. “BioFoundries to Enable Access to Infrastructure and
Resources for Advancing Modern Biology and Biotech-
nology (BioFoundries),” U.S. National Science Foundation,
accessed November 11, 2024, https://new.nsf.gov/funding/
opportunities/biofoundries-biofoundries-enable-ac-
cess-infrastructure-resources.
404. “U.S. Department of Defense Office of Strategic Capital,”
U.S. Department of Defense, Office of Strategic Capital,
accessed September 22, 2024, https://www.cto.mil/osc.
405. “DoD Releases 12 Awards for Distributed Bioindustri-
al Manufacturing Program,” U.S. Department of De-
fense, September 13, 2024, https://www.defense.gov/
News/Releases/Release/Article/3904890/dod-releas-
es-12-awards-for-distributed-bioindustrial-manufactur-
ing-program.
406. “Budget and Finance,” Defense Advanced Research Proj-
ects Agency, accessed September 22, 2024, https://www.
darpa.mil/about-us/budget-and-finance.
407 . “Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health (AR-
PA-H),” National Institutes of Health, accessed July 29,
2024, https://www.nih.gov/arpa-h.
408. “Programs,” Advanced Research Projects Agency for
Health, accessed September 22, 2024, https://arpa-h.gov/
research-and-funding/programs.
409. “About America’s Seed Fund Powered by NSF,” accessed
July 29, 2024, https://seedfund.nsf.gov/our-program.
410. “About America’s Seed Fund Powered by NSF.”
411. “About America’s Seed Fund Powered by NSF”; “NSF
Small Business Innovation Research/Small Business
Technology Transfer Phase I Programs (SBIR/STTR
Phase I),” U.S. National Science Foundation, accessed
September 21, 2024, https://new.nsf.gov/funding/oppor-
tunities/sbirsttr-phase-i-nsf-small-business-innovation-
research-small-business.
412. FY 2025 Budget Request to Congress (National Science
Foundation, March 11, 2024), https://nsf-gov-resources.
nsf.gov/files/00_NSF_FY25_CJ_Entire%20Rollup_web.
pdf.
413. “American Leadership in Biotechnology.”
414. “Cellular and Biochemical Engineering,” U.S. National
Science Foundation, June 16, 2023, https://new.nsf.gov/
funding/opportunities/cellular-biochemical-engineering;
“Designing Synthetic Cells Beyond the Bounds of Evolu-
tion (Designer Cells),” U.S. National Science Foundation,
November 6, 2023, https://new.nsf.gov/funding/oppor-
tunities/designing-synthetic-cells-beyond-bounds-evo-
lution; “Plant Genome Research Program (PGRP),” U.S.
National Science Foundation,” February 16, 2024, https://
new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/plant-genome-re-
search-program-pgrp.
415. “Breaking Down the CHIPS and Science Act,” American
Association for the Advancement of Science, accessed
July 29, 2024, https://www.aaas.org/programs/office-gov-
ernment-relations/breaking-down-chips-and-science-
act.
416. Christine Mui, “How Congress Defanged Biden’s Big Sci-
ence Push,” POLITICO, March 9, 2024, https://www.po-
litico.com/news/2024/03/09/biden-touted-science-fund-
ing-but-congress-hollowed-out-his-promise-00146065.
417 . FY 2025 Budget Request to Congress.
418. “NSF 24-525: Future Manufacturing (FM),” U.S. National
Science Foundation, January 10, 2024, https://new.nsf.
gov/funding/opportunities/future-manufacturing-fm/
nsf24-525/solicitation.
419. Bold Goals for U .S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing:
Harnessing Research and Development to Further Societal
Goals.
420. Bold Goals for U .S. Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing:
Harnessing Research and Development to Further Societal
Goals.
421. “Fiscal Year 2025 Budget in Brief,” U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, accessed November 11, 2024,
https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/fy-2025-budget-
in-brief.pdf.
422. Kavya Sekar, National Institutes of Health (NIH) Funding:
FY1996-FY2025, CRS report no. R43341 (Congressional
Research Service, June 25, 2024), https://sgp.fas.org/crs/
misc/R43341.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
@CNASDC
80
423. Sekar, National Institutes of Health (NIH) Funding:
FY1996-FY2025.
424. “H.R.34 - 21st Century Cures Act,” 114th Congress
(2015–2016), Congress.gov, December 13, 2016, https://
www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/34/
text; Sekar, National Institutes of Health (NIH) Funding.
425. “FY 2025 Budget Justification,” U.S. Department of Ener-
gy, Office of the Chief Financial Officer, March 11, 2024,
https://www.energy.gov/cfo/articles/fy-2025-budget-jus-
tification.
426. “Technical Assessment of the Capital Facility Needs
of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(2023),” National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
Medicine, 2023, https://nap.nationalacademies.org/down-
load/26684.
427 . “FACT SHEET: Biden-Harris Administration Announc-
es New Action Plan to Bolster, Expand, and Diversify
America’s Biotechnology and Biomanufacturing Work-
force,” The White House, June 27 , 2023, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2023/06/27/
fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announc-
es-new-action-plan-to-bolster-expand-and-diversi-
fy-americas-biotechnology-and-biomanufacturing-work-
force.
428. Chilukuri and Howell, “To Win the Tech Race, America
Needs High-Skilled Immigration Reform.”
429. “Advanced Technological Education (ATE),” U.S. National
Science Foundation, June 24, 2024, https://new.nsf.gov/
funding/opportunities/advanced-technological-educa-
tion-ate.
430. “New NSF Workforce Development Program Opens New
Doors in Emerging Technology Fields,” National Science
Foundation, October 19, 2022, https://new.nsf.gov/news/
new-nsf-workforce-development-program-opens-new.
431. “NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP),”
U.S. National Science Foundation, July 12, 2024, https://
new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/nsf-graduate-re-
search-fellowship-program-grfp.
432. “NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GFRP).”
433. “NIIMBL Announces 63 Students for the 2024 NIIMBL
eXperience,” Manufacturing USA, May 9, 2024, https://
www.manufacturingusa.com/news/niimbl-announc-
es-63-students-2024-niimbl-experience.
434. “NIIMBL Announces 63 Students for the 2024 NIIMBL
eXperience.”
435. “NIIMBL Announces 63 Students for the 2024 NIIMBL
eXperience.”
436. “Fellowships and Training Programs,” National Institute
of Mental Health, accessed August 1, 2024, https://www.
nimh.nih.gov/research/research-conducted-at-nimh/sci-
entific-director/office-of-fellowship-and-training/fellow-
ships-and-training-programs.
437 . Joseph R. Biden Jr., “Executive Order on the Safe, Secure,
and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial In-
telligence,” The White House, October 30, 2023, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-ac-
tions/2023/10/30/executive-order-on-the-safe-se-
cure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-artifi-
cial-intelligence.
438. Orli G. Bahcall, ed., “UK Biobank,” Nature Portfolio,
October 11, 2018, https://www.nature.com/collections/
bpthhnywqk.
439. “Our Funding,” UK Biobank, July 8, 2024, https://www.
ukbiobank.ac.uk/learn-more-about-uk-biobank/about-us/
our-funding.
440. “About Us,” Indiana Health Information Exchange, ac-
cessed July 29, 2024, https://www.ihie.org/about-us.
441. Evans and Jarvik, “Impact of HIPAA’s Minimum Neces-
sary Standard on Genomic Data Sharing.”
442. Evans and Jarvik, “Impact of HIPAA’s Minimum Neces-
sary Standard on Genomic Data Sharing.”
443. Kuntz, “Biotech Matters: Problems with Life Science
Databases in the United States.”
444. Kuntz, “Biotech Matters: Problems with Life Science
Databases in the United States.”
445. Kai Zhang and Xiaoqian Jiang, “Sensitive Data Detection
with High-Throughput Machine Learning Models in
Electrical Health Records,” AMIA Annual Symposium Pro-
ceedings 2023 (January 11, 2024): 814–823, https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10785837.
446. Nazish Khalid et al., “Privacy-Preserving Artificial Intelli-
gence in Healthcare: Techniques and Applications,” Com-
puters in Biology and Medicine 158 (May 2023): 106848,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106848.
447 . National Strategy to Advance Privacy-Preserving Data
Sharing and Analytics (National Science and Technology
Council, March 2023), https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2023/03/National-Strategy-to-Ad-
vance-Privacy-Preserving-Data-Sharing-and-Analytics.
pdf.
448. Andy Greenberg, “Medical-Targeted Ransomware Is
Breaking Records After Change Healthcare’s $22M Pay-
out,” Wired, June 12, 2024, https://www.wired.com/story/
change-healthcare-22-million-payment-ransomware-
spike.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
81
TECHNOLOGY & NATIONAL SECURITY | JANUARY 2025
Biopower: Securing American Leadership in Biotechnology
449. “HHS Announces Next Steps in Ongoing Work to En-
hance Cybersecurity for Health Care and Public Health
Sectors,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, December 6, 2023, https://www.hhs.gov/about/
news/2023/12/06/hhs-announces-next-steps-ongo-
ing-work-enhance-cybersecurity-health-care-pub-
lic-health-sectors.html.
450. Sam Sabin, “Ransomware Seizes Hospitals’ Blood
Supply,” AXIOS, August 2, 2024, https://www.axios.
com/2024/08/02/ransomware-oneblood-hospi-
tal-blood-supply.
451. “HHS Announces Next Steps in Ongoing Work to En-
hance Cybersecurity for Health Care and Public Health
Sectors.”
452. Bradshaw et al., “A New National Purpose: Leading the
Biotech Revolution.”
453. “Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement
(TEFCA),” HealthIT.gov, accessed July 29, 2024, https://
www.healthit.gov/topic/interoperability/policy/trust-
ed-exchange-framework-and-common-agreement-tefca.
454. Sarah Glaven, “The White House Advances Biotechnol-
ogy and Biomanufacturing Leadership with the Launch
of the National Bioeconomy Board National Bioecono-
my Board,” The White House, March 22, 2024, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2024/03/22/
the-white-house-advances-biotechnology-and-bioman-
ufacturing-leadership-with-the-launch-of-the-nation-
al-bioeconomy-board.
455. Biden, “Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trust-
worthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence.”
456. Measuring the Bioeconomy: Recommended Revisions to
the NAICS and NAPCS, EO 14081 (Interagency Technical
Working Group, Chief Statistician of the United States,
September 12, 2023), https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/
files/documents/OCE-Measuring-the-Bioeconomy.pdf.
457 . “Regulation of Biotechnology under TSCA and FIFRA,”
United States Environmental Protection Agency, accessed
July 29, 2024, https://www.epa.gov/regulation-biotech-
nology-under-tsca-and-fifra.
458. Nazish Jeffery, “What’s Next for The U.S. Bioeconomy?
Defining It,” Federation of American Scientists, June 22,
2023, https://fas.org/publication/whats-next-for-the-u-s-
bioeconomy-defining-it; “NIST Bioeconomy Lexicon.”
459. “EPA, FDA, and USDA Issue Joint Regulatory Plan for
Biotechnology,” U.S. Department of Agriculture, May
8, 2024, https://www.usda.gov/media/press-releas-
es/2024/05/08/epa-fda-and-usda-issue-joint-regulato-
ry-plan-biotechnology.
460. “EPA, FDA, and USDA Issue Joint Regulatory Plan for
Biotechnology”; “Biotechnology: White House Directs
EPA, FDA, and USDA to Update the Coordinated Frame-
work for the Regulation of Biotechnology.”
461. Report on Stakeholder Outreach Related to Ambiguities,
Gaps, Uncertainties in Regulation of Biotechnology Under
the Coordinated Framework (U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, March 11, 2023), https://usbio-
technologyregulation.mrp.usda.gov/eo14081-8a-stake-
holder-engagement.pdf.
462. “Home,” ASPI Critical Technology Tracker, accessed July
29, 2024, https://techtracker.aspi.org.au.
463. Hannah Kelley, “Biotech Matters: A U.S. National Security
Imperative,” Center for a New American Security, Febru-
ary 20, 2024, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/
biotech-matters.
464. Paul Sandle and Martin Coulter, “AI Safety Summit:
China, US and EU Agree to Work Together,” Reuters,
November 1, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/tech-
nology/britain-brings-together-political-tech-lead-
ers-talk-ai-2023-11-01.
465. “The Bletchley Declaration by Countries Attending the
AI Safety Summit, 1-2 November 2023,” UK government,
November 1, 2023, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/ai-safety-summit-2023-the-bletchley-decla-
ration/the-bletchley-declaration-by-countries-attending-
the-ai-safety-summit-1-2-november-2023.
466. “The Hiroshima AI Process: Leading the Global Chal-
lenge to Shape Inclusive Governance for Generative AI,”
KIZUNA, February 9, 2024, https://www.japan.go.jp/
kizuna/2024/02/hiroshima_ai_process.html.
467 . “Launch of AUKUS Pillar II’s First Trilateral Innovation
Challenge,” Australian government, Defence, March 26,
2024, https://www.defence.gov.au/news-events/releas-
es/2024-03-26/launch-aukus-pillar-iis-first-trilateral-in-
novation-challenge; “AUKUS Defense Investor Network
Launches,” PR Newswire, December 5, 2023, https://
www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/aukus-defense-in-
vestor-network-launches-302006167 .html; “AUKUS
Defense Ministers’ Joint Statement,” U.S. Department of
Defense, April 8, 2024, https://www.defense.gov/News/
Releases/Release/Article/3733790/aukus-defense-minis-
ters-joint-statement.
468. Curtis, Wright, and Kelley, Forging a New Era of U .S.-
Japan-South Korea Trilateral Cooperation: The Key to a
Stable, Secure Indo-Pacific.
469. Anna Puglisi, “China’s Hybrid Economy: What to Do
about BGI?” Center for Security and Emerging Technolo-
gy, February 2, 2024, https://cset.georgetown.edu/article/
chinas-hybrid-economy-what-to-do-about-bgi.
470. “Australia-Singapore Digital Economy Agreement.”

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
@CNASDC
82
471. Joe Nocera and Bethany McLean, “Operation Warp
Speed: The Untold Story of the COVID-19 Vaccine,”
Vanity Fair, October 12, 2023, https://www.vanityfair.com/
news/2023/10/operation-warp-speed-covid-19-vaccine.
472. “National Security Commission on Emerging Biotech-
nology Applauds Bipartisan ‘Driving U.S. Innovation
in Artificial Intelligence’ Roadmap,” National Security
Commission on Emerging Biotechnology, May 20, 2024,
https://www.biotech.senate.gov/press-releases/nation-
al-security-commission-on-emerging-biotechnology-ap-
plauds-bipartisan-driving-us-innovation-in-artificial-in-
telligence-roadmap.
473. “Senate Agriculture Committee Holds First Biotechnolo-
gy Hearing in 10 Years,” United States Senate Committee
on Agriculture, Nutrition, & Forestry, October 21, 2015,
https://www.agriculture.senate.gov/newsroom/press/re-
lease/senate-agriculture-committee-holds-first-biotech-
nology-hearing-in-10-years.
474. “Securing U.S. Leadership in the Bioeconomy,” U.S.
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, & Transpor-
tation, March 3, 2020, https://www.commerce.senate.
gov/2020/3/securing-u-s-leadership-in-the-bioeconomy.
475. David M. McIntosh et al., “Senate Committee Votes to
Send the BIOSECURE Act to the Senate Floor,” Ropes &
Gray LLP , March 7 , 2024, https://www.ropesgray.com/
en/insights/alerts/2024/03/senate-committee-votes-
to-send-the-biosecure-act-to-the-senate-floor; “118th
Congress: Hearings,” Homeland Security & Governmental
Affairs, accessed July 29, 2024, https://www.hsgac.senate.
gov/hearings.
476. “Hearing: ‘Growing Stakes: The Bioeconomy and Ameri-
can National Security,’” The Select Committee on the CCP ,
February 29, 2024, http://selectcommitteeontheccp.house.
gov/about/events/hearing-growing-stakes-bioecono-
my-and-american-national-security.
477 . Dudley, “The Chinese API Market.”

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
About the Center for a New
American Security
The mission of the Center for a New American Security (CNAS) is
to develop strong, pragmatic, and principled national security and
defense policies. Building on the expertise and experience of its
staff and advisors, CNAS engages policymakers, experts, and the
public with innovative, fact-based research, ideas and analysis to
shape and elevate the national security debate. A key part of our
mission is to inform and prepare the national security leaders of
today and tomorrow.
CNAS is located in Washington, D.C., and was established in
February 2007 by cofounders Kurt M. Campbell and Michèle A.
Flournoy. CNAS is a 501(c)3 tax-exempt nonprofit organization. Its
research is independent and nonpartisan.
©2025 Center for a New American Security
All rights reserved.
Center for a New American Security
1701 Pennsylvania Ave NW
Suite 700
Washington, DC 20006
CNAS.org
@CNASdc
CEO
Richard Fontaine
Executive Vice President & Director
of Studies
Paul Scharre
Senior Vice President of Development
Anna Saito Carson
Contact Us
202.457.9400
info@cnas.org
CNAS Editorial
DIRECTOR OF STUDIES
Paul Scharre
DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF STUDIES
Katherine L. Kuzminski
PUBLICATIONS & EDITORIAL DIRECTOR
Maura McCarthy
SENIOR EDITOR
Emma Swislow
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Caroline Steel
CREATIVE DIRECTOR
Melody Cook
Cover Art & Production Notes
COVER ILLUSTRATION
Mark Harris
REPORT DESIGN
Mardiyah Miller
COVER IMAGES
iStock by Getty Images
PRINTER
CSI Printing & Graphics
Printed on an HP Indigo Digital Press

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
