
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Adapting Security: The
Intersection of Turkiye’s
Foreign Policy and Defence
Industrialisation
Arda Mevlütoğlu, Çağlar Kurç, Serhat Güvenç and Sıtkı Egeli
June 2024
The International Institute
for Strategic Studies
Bilkent
Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
İhsan Doğramaci Peace Foundation

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
Acknowledgements
This paper is a part of ‘National Defence Industry: From an Enabler of Turkey’s Pursuit of Strategic Autonomy to a Bridge
between Turkey and Europe’, a joint project between the Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research (CFPPR) and the
International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS). The project is supported by the Centre for Applied Turkey Studies (CATS).
Disclaimers
The views outlined in this paper are exclusively those of the authors and do not represent institutional views of the
CFPPR or the IISS.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 3
Contents
Executive Summary 4
Introduction 5
Section 1: The Early Decades 7
Survival in a Multipolar World: Ottoman Legacies of the Early Republican Era 7
Enter Bipolar World: Threats, Fears and Alignment 7
Section 2: Lesson Relearned: Defence Industry Imperative for Autonomous
 Foreign Policy 9
Shock and Realisation 10
Rebuilding Through International Cooperation in the 1980s and 1990s 11
New Opportunities 12
Section 3: Leveraging Arms Deals to Win Hearts and Minds 13
The ‘Phantom Alliance’: The
High Point of Israel–Turkiye Defence Cooperation 13
The ATAK Project 13
The Supply Side of Turkiye’s Role in the Global Arms Trade 15
Section 4: Multipolar Order and the Expansion of the Defence Industry 18
Turkish Foreign Policy Under the AKP 18
Peaking Defence Exports 18
Conclusion 22
Cover
A lineup of Bayraktar Akıncı UAVs at Baykar’s Flight Training and Test Center in Istanbul, 5 July 2022
(BAYKAR/Handout/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images)

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
Executive Summary
Following decades of investment and reform, Turkiye’s
defence industry is emerging as a serious player in
international defence markets. The path to its success,
however, has not been straightforward. As an emerging
power, Turkiye has had to balance its desire for strategic
autonomy against a multitude of other factors, includ -
ing relations with the United States, other NATO allies
and the European Union. Moreover, just as domestic
leaders have left their individual marks on Turkiye’s
foreign policy, they have also influenced the country’s
defence-industrial policies.
Ankara’s defence interests have both reflected the
international political system and been used by national
decision-makers to help navigate international politics. For
example, alignment with the US led to an influx of Western
defence equipment during the early Cold War. Though this
allowed the Turkish Armed Forces to rapidly modernise,
the glut of equipment retarded the development of the
country’s nascent arms industry. Restrictions imposed
on the use of US-supplied weapons during the Cyprus
Crisis (1963–64) exposed the limits of US alignment. Also
important have been the numerous arms embargoes
(both official and unofficial) by allied states, which have
perpetuated a sense of injustice within Turkiye and driven
the country’s defence-industrial policies.
As the Turkish economy began to liberalise in the
1980s, Turkiye’s defence industry adapted by pursuing
joint ventures with Western firms. In exchange for access
to Turkish markets, Western companies brought in new
technologies and capital to co-manufacture their products
in Turkiye. By the early 1990s, the collapse of the Soviet
Union also allowed Turkiye to establish good relations
with the newly formed Russian Federation. At the same
time, membership in the EU became a pivotal theme in
Turkiye’s post-Cold War foreign-policy trajectory.
Although defence-industrial relations and the
Turkish arms market have played key roles in both
Russian and European relations, Turkiye’s endeavour
to develop its defence industry was not only about
increasing the quality of its domestic arms production.
New partners also reflect Ankara’s desire to diversify
its defence-industry ties and to find alternatives to the
Western suppliers that had been unreliable in the past.
This would lead to highly controversial decisions such
as the procurement of Russian S-400 (RS-SA-21 Growler)
air defence systems, and the subsequent ejection of
Turkiye from a project to jointly build the Lockheed
Martin F-35 Lightning II combat aircraft.
By the 2010s, the first concrete results of indigenous
designs and products began to emerge. The platform
and system solutions that became available provided
the Turkish military with cutting-edge capabilities
tailored to its needs. This has helped alleviate a fear of
abandonment and several of those indigenous solu -
tions have also proved attractive among export cus -
tomers. This has allowed Turkiye to position itself as a
market disruptor, with its industry exhibiting strong
growth and innovation. Yet, having experienced a
remarkable expansion in its defence exports, Turkish
industry and authorities are now under intense pres -
sure to sustain this growth. The pressure to export at
all costs risks damaging international relations and
tainting Turkiye’s image internationally – especially
if decision-makers are unable to connect the direct
linkage between defence exports and the responsibil -
ity of exporting governments. In this regard, today’s
multipolar system provides both opportunities and
risks as Turkiye uses the availability of willing part -
ners to prop up its defence-industrial capabilities and
balance its new and emerging interests.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 5
In recent years, few arms deals have attracted as
much attention and debate as Turkiye’s 2017 deci -
sion to buy the Russian S-400 (RS-SA-21 Growler )
air defence system. Following a decade of some -
what transactional relations with its Western allies,
the decision to buy the S-400 precipitated a heated
debate about Turkiye’s foreign policy and defence
alignment. 1 Seen by many as a harbinger of strate -
gic realignment, Turkiye’s decision to buy the S-400
gave rise to concerns that the NATO member was
seeking to unilaterally deepen ties with Russia, fur -
ther straining an already-tense relationship with its
Western allies 2 and leading to Ankara’s ousting from
a project to jointly build the F-35. Though the debate
largely subsided in the wake of Russia’s February
2022 invasion of Ukraine – with Turkish military and
diplomatic support being vital to Kyiv’s war efforts
– the seeming contradictions in Turkiye’s strategic
positioning and foreign policy remain.
To understand the differences between Turkiye’s
foreign policy and its striving for autonomy in arms
acquisitions and development, analysts need to
consider the multi-layered, multi-dimensional and
dynamic relationships between Turkiye’s foreign
and defence policies. The international system is a
major factor here, especially as Cold War alignment
provided challenges and opportunities to Turkiye’s
foreign policy and, by extension, its defence policies.
Similarly, the geopolitical shifts of the 1990s led to
an increasingly multipolar system that has allowed
Ankara to acquire weapons from multiple suppliers
while opening potential export markets. Domestic
politics also play a significant role in shaping the
Turkish perceptions of the international system,
although to a lesser degree.
To explore these themes, this report traces the roots of
Turkish decision-making in arms procurement and devel-
opment to the early years of the republic and the relative
Introduction
 (Muhammed Enes Yildirim/Anadolu via Getty Images)
Pakistan’s PNS Babur corvette, based on Turkiye’s MilGem design, and the Turkish Navy’s TCG İstanbul frigate in Turkiye, 22 April 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
freedom of the inter-war years (1919–38). It then describes
how the bipolar international order that emerged after the
Second World War led to alignment with the US. As the
report shows, the 1960s, however, would expose the ten-
sions between strategic alliances and national autonomy
as the Cyprus Crisis revealed Turkiye’s overreliance on
the US in defence procurement. The crisis, including a
series of official and unofficial arms embargoes, would
have a profound impact on Turkish decision-makers and
drove awareness of the need for self-sufficiency in arms
production. The paper will discuss how this spurred the
foundations of today’s defence industry in Turkiye, which
has gone from a complete reliance on US equipment up to
the 1970s, to greater international cooperation in the 1980s
and 1990s, before then seeking to leverage arms deals
to win hearts and minds in Europe and elsewhere more
recently. Throughout these periods, as the report shows,
we see the interweaving of the two distinct, but related,
strands of Turkiye’s foreign policy and defence industri-
alisation coming to the fore.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 7
1. The Early Decades
Survival in a Multipolar World:
Ottoman Legacies of the Early
Republican Era
Modern Turkiye emerged as a nation-state in 1923, dur-
ing Europe’s inter-war period. The international order at
the time reflected multipolar dynamics, with power and
influence spread across a diverse number of actors. This
provided Turkiye with relative autonomy in foreign
policy. In contrast with its status in the late Ottoman
period (1800–1914), during which it faced both internal
threats from nationalist movements and external threats
from major European powers, the young republic was
content with the existing international order. It was
therefore able to navigate Europe’s volatile geopolitical
landscape in acquiring arms, especially for its navy and
air force, from all the major international actors of the
period. The result was a diverse inventory of aircraft,
naval vessels and armoured vehicles. Acquisition of
modern defence hardware, albeit in modest quantities,
was accompanied by investment in defence-industrial
capabilities to reduce dependence on foreign suppliers.
Between the mid-1920s and the 1940s, defence indus -
trialisation focused mainly on shipbuilding and aircraft
industries, as reflected in the number of enterprises and
facilities that were established during that period.3
During the Second World War, Turkiye followed a
policy of active neutrality. This allowed it to avoid enter-
ing the war while seeking material and financial benefits
from both sides. Barter deals involving raw materi -
als for weapons were concluded with Nazi Germany
until the last phase of the war. Simultaneously, size -
able equipment transfers were received from Britain in
return for Turkiye positioning itself close to the Allies. 4
However, it was not always easy to keep both sides
happy. Although Turkiye wanted to stay out of the war
at all costs, as the positions and goals of the warring par-
ties shifted, so too did their expectations from Turkiye.
As the balance on the battlefield eventually shifted in
their favour, the Allied powers became increasingly
frustrated as Turkiye continued trading with Germany.
(Dominique Berretty/Gamma-Rapho Via Getty Images)
A Turkish Air Force North American Aviation F-100D Super Sabre supplied by the US from 1959

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
Enter Bipolar World: Threats, Fears
and Alignment
Although active neutrality shielded Turkiye from the
devastation of war, it also distanced Ankara from the
conflict’s victors. Turkiye’s relations with the Soviet
Union had already begun to deteriorate in 1939. After
the war, Josef Stalin’s territorial demands from Ankara,
coupled with Turkiye’s economic and military weak -
ness, heightened fears of imminent Soviet military
action and blackmailing. 5 Thus, immediate security
concerns, combined with fears of isolation and aban -
donment, started to shape the country’s strategic think-
ing. Consequently, Turkiye aligned itself with the US – a
distant offshore balancer – against its revisionist Soviet
neighbour. The alignment was facilitated by Turkiye’s
decades-long modernisation and Westernisation ambi -
tions. Yet alignment was still a major policy shift from
neutrality, and it had an immediate impact on the
Turkish military as well as on the country’s defence
planning and acquisition.
The Economic and Technical Cooperation agreement,
signed in July 1947 by Turkiye and the US, signified a
major milestone for Turkiye’s military build-up, and it
would have a long-lasting impact on Turkiye’s defence
industry. To facilitate its military build-up, Turkiye
received large amounts of surplus defence equipment,
as well as training and technical assistance, from the US.
Though this led to an increasingly capable military, it
would also hold back development of its own defence
industry.6 The 1947 agreement with the US also impacted
the country’s national defence and security paradigms.
This is because Article 4 of the agreement stated that
Ankara was under no circumstances allowed to use US
weapons or equipment without Washington’s prior con-
sent. There was no provision for Turkiye’s national con-
tingencies and its own defence goals and priorities.7
Despite the rapid influx of foreign weapons,
achieving maintenance and production capability
for military hardware was nonetheless kept on the
agenda – as seen by the founding of the Ministry of
National Defence (MND) Research and Development
Department in 1959. 8 In the early 1960s, the national
desire to manufacture (or at least maintain) defence
equipment was also demonstrated via the coun -
try’s first Five-Year Development Plan issued in
1963, which contained the strategic goal of gaining a
national aircraft maintenance capability. At the height
of the Cold War, these policies amounted to the redis -
covery of the importance of sustaining minimum
defence-industrial capabilities, as well as represent -
ing the country’s initial efforts to reduce its absolute
reliance on foreign arms supplies. The importance of
reducing this reliance would soon be dramatically
made evident.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 9
2. Lesson Relearned: Defence Industry
Imperative for Autonomous Foreign Policy
In December 1963, intercommunal violence broke out
on the island of Cyprus. At the time, Turkiye lacked the
military capability to intervene. Moreover, the Soviet
Union had declared its intention to defend the sover -
eignty and independence of the Republic of Cyprus.
When Turkiye turned to the US for help, it received a
stark rebuke from US president Lyndon Johnson.
In a letter to Turkish prime minister İsmet İnönü,
Johnson reminded Turkiye that it could not use
US-supplied military equipment without American
consent. Johnson further warned that Ankara should
not count on US assistance in the event of a Soviet
military intervention and any ensuing conflict over
non-NATO contingencies. 9 As the entire inventory
of the Turkish armed forces consisted at the time of
US-supplied equipment, the Johnson letter effectively
restricted Turkiye’s use of military force to pursue its
national interests.
The letter also opened the eyes of Turkish policymakers
to the urgent need for independent national power-
projection capabilities, the importance of diversifying arms
suppliers, and the need to reinvest in the defence industry.
The 1964 Cyprus Crisis and the Johnson letter
resulted in a moderate shift in Turkiye’s foreign policy,
with Ankara undertaking diplomatic efforts to enlist
support for its position on Cyprus. The former position
of relying heavily on the supply of US defence equip -
ment was a legacy of Ankara’s earlier uncompromis -
ing pro-Western stand. In this sense, the Cyprus Crisis
set the framework for its multifaceted foreign policy.
Moreover, the diversification of Turkiye’s foreign rela -
tions could be pursued without damage to Turkiye’s
place within the Western security community, primarily
because of detente between Eastern and Western blocs.
Starting from 1967, Turkiye sought to improve its
relations with the Soviet Union through several indus -
trial cooperation schemes. The 1967 military coup in
Greece also brought Ankara and Moscow closer diplo -
matically as both were against enosis – Greece’s political
union with Cyprus, which Turkiye considered annexa -
tion by the former of the latter. 10 This multifaceted for -
eign policy, however, did not result in Turkiye turning
to non-Western arms suppliers. Instead, it diversified
suppliers within NATO, with new orders placed pri -
marily with West Germany and Italy. To address its lim-
ited military capabilities, remedies were swiftly enacted
and orders were placed for the most pressing power-
projection assets – e.g., transport aircraft, helicopters
and landing craft – for a possible military intervention
in Cyprus. Many of these efforts involved resurrecting
local defence facilities.11
Though these orders provided a much-needed life -
line for military-operated support and maintenance
centres, the finances to feed such expanded acquisition
and industrialisation were not necessarily forthcoming.
In times of financial strain, Turkiye has turned to public
donations to support defence procurement and indus -
trialisation projects. The Naval Support Foundation was
the forerunner of donation campaigns to support naval
procurement. The Land Force Support Foundation and
Air Force Support Foundation were also established
in the 1970s, with the Air Force Support Foundation
explicitly supporting the building of an indigenous
fighter. Yet public donations to these foundations were
insufficient for the required financial outlays. Although
the military pushed for new hardware and domes -
tic production, Turkiye’s political elites were not fully
committed to such investment. Nonetheless, the early
to mid-1970s saw the founding of two critical defence
enterprises: TUSAŞ, now known as Turkish Aerospace
Industries (TAI), established in 1973 for the production
and maintenance of aircraft, and ASELSAN, established
in 1975 to focus on military electronics. Those two
entities, now mainstays of the Turkish defence indus -
try, heralded the re-emergence of the national defence
industry after an interruption of nearly 30 years.
In July 1974, the Greek junta engineered a coup
d’état in Cyprus. When Turkiye could not convince the

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
United Kingdom – one of the three guarantors of the
constitutional order on the island – to intervene, Ankara
launched its own military operation. By that time, the
Turkish military had incorporated a fairly large fleet of
transport aircraft, helicopters and landing craft into its
inventory. It had also constituted expeditionary forces
such as marines, paratroopers and underwater-specialist
units.12 In July 1974, the first wave of landings took place.
This was followed by a second military operation aimed
at connecting the Turkish-controlled areas, with an
eventual aim being the use of territory as a bargaining
chip. However, unlike the first phase of the operation,
which drew some legitimacy from the agreements behind
the creation of the Cypriot republic, the second operation
was not accepted by the international community and
resulted in a significant diplomatic backlash against
Turkiye. One of the strongest punitive reactions came
from the US and took the form of a complete arms
embargo imposed on the Turkish armed forces, which
formally took effect in February 1975. Consequently, all
grants, credits and sales to Turkiye involving US-made
weapons came to a standstill.
Shock and Realisation
The embargo had a direct impact on the operational
capabilities and readiness of the Turkish armed forces,
especially on a Turkish Air Force completely dependent
on US spare parts. The combat readiness of aircraft, capi-
tal naval vessels, armoured vehicles and communication
equipment quickly deteriorated. 13 The Turkish govern-
ment rushed to find alternative sources for spare parts,
partially circumventing restrictions via other operators
of US-origin equipment (e.g., Libya and Pakistan). In
parallel, talks were initiated with several NATO coun -
tries to purchase new weapons and equipment. Among
them were Canada, France, Germany, Italy and the UK.
One of the immediate concrete outcomes was an order
in 1975 for F-104S fighter aircraft, an Italian-assembled
variant of the American F-104 Starfighter which was
already in service with the Turkish Air Force. Similarly,
second-hand combat aircraft and armoured vehicles
were acquired from West Germany.14
Another direct reaction was to suspend the opera -
tions of US bases inside the country by moving them
to ‘provisional’ status. At the time, 25 US bases on
Turkish soil housed more than 15,000 American per -
sonnel.15 The embargo acted as a stark reminder that,
despite decade-old efforts, Turkiye’s military remained
almost absolutely dependent on US defence supplies.
Building upon the trauma of the Johnson letter, this
second shock underscored the need to reinvigorate the
country’s defence industry if Turkiye wanted to pur -
sue its own interests. 16
The US arms embargo was progressively lifted, com-
ing to an end in September 1978. Shortly afterwards,
Turkiye ended the provisional status of American bases.
This relief came at a critical juncture for American foreign
policy, as the Shah regime in Iran, a crucial regional ally
of the US, collapsed the following year. Following the
Shah’s replacement by the Islamic regime of Ayatollah
Khomeini, American military aid to Turkiye quickly
resumed and large quantities of US military equipment
began pouring in. However, having already learned its
lesson, this time Turkiye remained firmly committed to
developing its national defence industries.
Turkiye’s 1974 operation in Cyprus thus presents an
interesting, and somewhat rare, case study whereby
the acquisition of the appropriate military (force pro -
jection) equipment widened the range of options and
room for manoeuvre for decision-makers in Ankara. In
doing so, it directly influenced Turkiye’s foreign pol -
icy during that period. Arguably, the only other time
 (Keystone-France/Gamma-Rapho Via Getty Images)
US president Lyndon Johnson welcomes Turkish prime minister
İsmet İnönü to the White House, Washington, 25 June 1964

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 11
such a phenomenon presented itself previously was on
the verge of the First World War, when the struggle to
modernise the Ottoman navy played a role in their cata-
strophic decision to ally the empire with Germany, ulti-
mately leading to the break-up of the Ottoman Empire.
Rebuilding Through International
Cooperation in the 1980s and 1990s
As the detente between the US and the Soviet Union
came to an end in the late 1970s, Turkish foreign policy
also shifted. Turkiye sought closer relations with the
US, while distrust of the Soviet Union rose following
Moscow’s invasion of Afghanistan. Developments in
Turkiye’s domestic political scene, with the military
rule of 1980–83 followed by the liberalising economic
and political policies of prime minister Turgut Özal,
supplemented this westward shift. In this respect, the
1980s witnessed the beginning of a new period of ever-
increasing engagement with the West.
An important pact for this shift was the Defense and
Economic Cooperation Agreement (DECA) signed in
1980 between the US and Turkiye.17 Through DECA, the
US successfully reinstated its defence engagement in
Turkiye to the levels preceding the 1975 arms embargo.
This entailed greater access to military bases and intelli-
gence hubs, as well as deployment of additional nuclear
warheads.18 Turkiye tried to leverage DECA to advance
its defence-industrial base. Accordingly, Ankara sought
assistance from the US in manufacturing various
defence items, including anti-armour weapons, fuzes,
explosives and rockets. Assistance was also sought for
the establishment of facilities for aircraft maintenance
and armoured-vehicle upgrades, including main bat -
tle tanks. Ankara saw the monetary and technical
assistance received under DECA as a vital means to
alleviate the financial strain on Turkiye’s already-vul -
nerable economy whilst also establishing a more capa -
ble defence-industrial base.
From 1983, Turkiye’s defence-industrial model
evolved under the premiership of Turgut Özal with the
introduction of the joint-venture model. This provided
the framework within which Western defence manu -
facturers were encouraged to team up with Turkish
private-sector investors. As part of this model, Western
Marc Deville/Gamma-Rapho Via Getty Images
The TAI F-16 assembly plant in Turkiye, October 1988

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
manufacturers would bring in the required technologies
and capital to co-manufacture their products in Turkiye.
The effort was led by the Peace Onyx programmes,
which began with kit-assembly F-16 fighter aircraft and
their engines before graduating to fuselage and wing
production and final assembly. The joint-venture model
soon blossomed to incorporate armoured vehicles and a
variety of defence electronics products, such as radios,
radars and electronic warfare equipment. This short -
cut to instant technology and know-how transfer from
leading American and European defence contractors
allowed the Turkish defence industry to begin accumu-
lating experience, cutting-edge manufacturing methods
and project management skills.
By the early 1990s, a variety of new joint-venture
companies formed. Together with existing defence com-
panies such as ASELSAN, TUSAŞ and HAVELSAN,
and new state-led ones such as Roketsan, those enter -
prises constituted the building blocks of a modern,
full-fledged defence industry. Gaining, then preserv -
ing, advanced defence-industrial capabilities has been
a constant and uncompromised policy priority for each
and every government ever since.
New Opportunities
The early 1990s also saw the formation of a new inter -
national order after the collapse of the Soviet Union
drastically reconfigured European security dynamics.
Accordingly, Turkiye sought to establish good relations
with the newly formed Russian Federation. One obvi -
ous objective for Ankara was to increase economic coop-
eration and trade with Russia. Yet Turkiye also saw close
and multi-layered relations with Moscow as a way to
prevent Moscow from re-imposing its economic, political
and military clout over the Black Sea, the Caucasus, and
Central Asia. As for relations with the West, membership
in the EU became a key theme in Turkiye’s post-Cold
War foreign policy trajectory. In short, with the ending
of the Cold War’s bipolar order, Turkiye began to reach
out to different regions and actors to pursue its national
interests more freely. This pattern was also reflected in
Turkiye’s defence procurement and industry policies.
The end of the Cold War enabled Europe to reap
the so-called peace dividend, while Ankara’s ambi -
tious military modernisation programmes continued
unabated for two reasons. Firstly, the technology gap
between Turkiye and its NATO allies had grown dur -
ing the 1970s. Turkiye’s new procurement and indus -
trialisation programmes were meant to close that gap
in military capabilities. Secondly, in contrast to many
of its European allies, Turkiye began to face new secu -
rity challenges in the form of growing regional rivalry
with Greece in the Aegean and Cyprus. Turkiye also
saw a revived threat from the Kurdistan Workers’ Party
(Partiya Karkerên Kurdistanê , PKK), which effectively
took advantage of the power vacuum that emerged in
Iraq after the 1991 Gulf War.
In a shrinking global defence market, Turkiye thus
became a sought-after customer. However, its more
autonomous and at times assertive foreign policy was
not always approved of by its arms suppliers in the
West. Nonetheless, the new international environment
gave Ankara more options to buy defence equipment.19
Ankara could now shift between different suppliers
and use defence procurement to supplement its for -
eign policy goals, in a fashion not too different from the
practices of the Ottomans roughly a century before.20 In
retrospect, such increased flexibility created the envi -
ronment for foreign policy, defence acquisition and
industry to complement and reinforce one another,
though Turkiye’s record of complementing its foreign
policy through arms sales was chequered at best.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 13
3. Leveraging Arms Deals to Win Hearts
and Minds
The ‘Phantom Alliance’: The
High Point of Israel–Turkiye
Defence Cooperation
In the second half of the 1990s, Israel became unexpect-
edly prominent in Turkiye’s foreign relations and arms
deals. Numerous factors combined to allow this. Firstly,
with high-tech defence products compatible with NATO
standards, Israel was a credible alternative supplier will-
ing to engage in Turkish defence cooperation. Secondly,
in stark contrast to many European states and the US,
Israel was also prepared to cooperate without any strings
attached, making it highly attractive politically.21 Thirdly,
the overlap in critical areas of Israeli and Turkish regional
threat perceptions meant Israel was seen as key to break-
ing out of this perceived hostile encirclement. Indeed,
at one point, some even claimed that Ankara might
find itself fighting Greece, Syria and the PKK simulta -
neously.22 Fourthly, defence and security cooperation
with Israel reaffirmed the primacy of the Turkish mili -
tary in domestic as well as foreign policymaking. The
close partnership with Israel was masterminded by the
Turkish military, although this would later be a source
of embarrassment to Necmettin Erbakan’s Welfare
Party (WP) during his premiership (1996–97). 23 Finally,
improved bilateral relations with Israel were expected to
be rewarded by pro-Israel supporters in the US Congress
to counter the influence of Greek and Armenian lobbies.24
Israel soon joined the ranks of Turkiye’s top arms sup-
pliers and became its most important security partner in
the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean. Cooperation
was particularly effective in upgrading Turkiye’s inventory
of US-built military hardware, such as the F-4E Phantom II
fighter-bomber aircraft, the AH-1F/P Cobra attack helicop-
ters and the M60A1/A3 Patton main battle tanks. The F-4E
upgrade programme symbolised the nature of the rela -
tionship between Ankara and Tel Aviv, as ‘the Phantom
Alliance’.25 From the outset, contracting Israel Aerospace
Industries (IAI) for the Turkish F-4E upgrade programme
was also meant to convey a strong deterrent message to
Damascus regarding its support for the PKK.26 The F-4E
deal remains the highlight of Turkish–Israeli defence-
industry relations in the 1990s. For instance, unrestricted
access to the upgraded F-4E Terminator’s mission computer
subsequently enabled Turkiye to develop, test and pro-
duce its own family of smart munitions, as well as air-to-air
and air-to-ground missiles. Although the Israeli defence-
industry connection gave Turkiye much-needed breathing
space at the time of Western arms embargoes, it did not
survive the first decade of Justice and Development Party
(Adalet ve Kalkınma Partisi, AKP) rule and its foreign policy
of ‘Zero Problems with Neighbours’, which sought to end
decades of estrangement with Turkiye’s neighbours.
The ATAK Project
Turkiye’s ATAK attack helicopter project offers
another interesting case study on how oscillations
in foreign policy have affected defence-procurement
decisions. In 1996, a Request for Proposals (RfP) was
issued for 145 attack helicopters through license pro -
duction. Though unconfirmed, it is likely that the
ATAK project was launched after the US government
proved reluctant to seek congressional approval for (AREF TAMMAWI/AFP via Getty Images)
A convoy of Turkish M60T tanks operating in Syria, 19
February 2020

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
an additional batch of ten AH-1W Super Cobras for the
Turkish Army.
All major manufacturers expressed interest in the
ATAK project, but only five companies responded to the
RfP by 1998. These were Bell-Textron and Boeing from
the US, offering the AH-1Z King Cobra and AH-64D
Apache Longbow , respectively; Italy’s Agusta with the
A129 Mangusta; Eurocopter of France/Germany offering
Tiger; and Kamov/IAI from Russia and Israel offering
a modified version of Ka-50-2 in tandem configuration
with westernised avionics. 27 South African Denel con -
sidered competing with its CSH-2 Rooivalk but stayed
out of the tender due to a South African government
ban on arms exports to Turkiye.
Political considerations materially downgraded
the likelihood of success for European manufacturers.
First, the German government imposed restrictions on
Tiger during the demonstration phase, as Berlin sought
to enforce pre-existing arms restrictions on Turkiye.
There were also problems with the A129 Mangusta,
which failed in firing trials. However, this problem
paled in comparison with an unexpected and sudden
decline in Italian–Turkish relations. These deteriorated
rapidly in 1998 when Abdullah Öcalan, leader of the
PKK, was given temporary refuge in Italy after his
extradition from Syria.
Despite these problems, European helicopter manu -
facturers were not ousted from the competition. A major
factor in this appears to be Turkiye’s desire to main -
tain support for its bid for EU membership, while also
tempting potential suppliers with lucrative contracts. 28
In December 1999, Turkiye was finally declared an EU
candidate. Among other things, leveraging arms deals
may have paid off in helping secure the candidacy.
Becoming an EU candidate also dramatically changed
Turkiye’s international status and justified termination
of remaining arms restrictions imposed on it. However,
improved relations do not always translate into success-
ful deals. In March 2000, prime minister Bülent Ecevit
announced that both Boeing AH-64D Apache Longbow
and Eurocopter Tiger failed to qualify for selection on
the grounds of cost-effectiveness. This decision was
officially protested by French president Jacques Chirac
who cancelled an official visit to Ankara. In this case,
attempting to leverage an arms deal had backfired.29
Ironically, Ankara would court two US manufacturers
and a Russian/Israeli entry to get around the US refusal to
sell Super Cobra. In July 2000, Bell-Textron’s AH-1Z King
Cobra was picked as the winner, followed by the Kamov/
IAI Ka-50-2 Erdoğan and the Agusta A129 Mangusta
in second and third place. Yet negotiations with Bell-
Textron dragged on for years due to a disagreement over
(Mehmet Murat Onel/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images)
Turkish Land Forces T129 ATAK attack helicopters at Güvercinlik air base, Ankara, 17 October 2014

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 15
Turkish access to the helicopter’s mission computer. In
2004, the project was officially cancelled. It was revived
in 2006 as ATAK II, albeit for 91 units instead of 145.
The change in Turkiye’s status was evident in the sec-
ond iteration of the ATAK project. Although it failed to
attract US defence manufacturers, Kamov, Eurocopter,
AgustaWestland and Denel made bids. AgustaWestland
and Denel – with the A129 Mangusta and CSH-2
Rooivalk, respectively – emerged as the strongest con -
tenders and were shortlisted. In 2007, the contract was
finally awarded to AgustaWestland. Arguably, this was
to reward Italy’s support for Turkiye’s bid for the EU
membership under prime minister Silvio Berlusconi,
with whom Turkish prime minister Recep Tayyip
Erdoğan had developed close personal relations.30
Turkiye’s short-lived European moment did not begin
in 1999, but in 2003. After the terrorist attacks on New York
and Washington on 11 September 2001, US interventionist
policies in Turkiye’s neighbourhood transformed the US
from a distant offshore balancer to a proximate risk factor,
even a source of threat. At the same time, Turkiye’s strategic
interests began to converge less with the Atlanticist pillar
of the transatlantic alliance and more with the European
pillar. For example, Ankara refused to get involved in the
US invasion of Iraq in 2003 and ended up on the same side
as ‘old Europe’, which emphasised soft power and mul-
tilateralism in international politics in stark contrast with
the American choice for hard power and unilateralism.
This strategic realignment with Europe, either by choice
or by necessity, had implications for Turkiye’s domestic
politics as well. It helped prime minister Erdoğan instru-
mentalise Turkiye’s EU accession to curb the role and
influence of the military in foreign policy. The consequent
power shift turned defence industry decision-making
on its head, with elected civilian authorities making the
calls.31 This European momentum in Turkish foreign
policy and domestic politics worked to the benefit of
European defence companies, while Turkish–American
defence-industry relations hit an alarming all-time low.32
The Supply Side of Turkiye’s Role
in the Global Arms Trade
A new phase of Turkiye’s defence-industrial develop -
ment began in the mid-1990s with Ankara transitioning
from being solely an importer to an arms exporter as
well. For the first time, Turkiye’s defence industry and
its exports were used to help push foreign policy objec-
tives, and they were relied upon to develop and deepen
relations with several states.
Turkiye’s first exports included the sale of armoured
vehicles and rocket artillery to the United Arab Emirates
(UAE). Turkish defence contractors also sought to
increase their footprint in politically important areas.
For instance, Azerbaijan and Georgia began receiving
significant military training, technical assistance and
second-hand defence items. Azerbaijan, in particular,
became a leading customer of Turkish defence prod -
ucts, including artillery rockets, armoured vehicles
and military communication gear. These deals closely
aligned with Turkiye’s wider foreign policy objective to
balance Russia in the Transcaucasus region.
In the Middle East, Turkiye consolidated its rela -
tionship with the UAE through more orders of tracked
armoured vehicles, rocket artillery systems and patrol
boats. Turkiye also provided training support for the
UAE’s transition to US-made F-16 fighters. Likewise,
export orders and licence-production schemes with
Pakistan, which were induced during the late-1980s,
continued to expand throughout the 1990s, and in a
manner that elevated already-strong diplomatic rela -
tions. Yet, taking into account its close partnership with
Pakistan, Turkiye shied away from cooperating with
India in the defence field or trying its luck in the lucra -
tive Indian defence market. This was perhaps the first
time that Turkiye found itself having to make hard deci-
sions on its choice of defence partners.33
With early successes, the potential for export orders
soon became an important criterion for prioritising
and developing diplomatic and military-to-military
relations. Among these export successes are Algeria,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and the UAE. In short, the pros -
pects for export orders began to exert an influence over
foreign policy. However, it was not long before the
unintended consequences of this shift became apparent.
The 1992 sale of Turkish-assembled F-16s to Egypt
was an eye-opening example of adverse repercussions
and complications. In this deal brokered by the US, TAI,
a joint venture between TUSAŞ and Lockheed Martin,
was responsible for the final assembly and testing of the

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
aircraft. However, TAI’s liability for offset obligations
came as a surprise. Cairo’s expectation that Ankara
would also buy Egyptian defence products also irri -
tated bilateral relations. The impasse was only over -
come when the Turkish military was forced to place an
order for Egyptian-assembled cross-country vehicles,
despite lacking any such need.
Beyond increasing exports, Turkiye’s defence-indus-
try development also incorporates Ankara’s desire to
diversify its defence-industry partners and find alter -
natives to the Western suppliers. In the immediate
aftermath of the Cold War, one such opportunity pre -
sented itself with Kazakhstan, which inherited valuable
defence manufacturing and technological capabilities
from the Soviet Union. Ankara made extensive efforts
during the 1990s to improve its economic and diplo -
matic relations with Kazakhstan. Though Ankara was
unsuccessful in gaining access to new technologies, it
nonetheless laid the groundwork for future coopera -
tion, such as the Kazakhstan Aselsan Engineering joint
venture that produces electro-optical and night-vision
systems for armoured vehicles.34 Other efforts to extract
defence-industrial and technological benefits from for -
mer Warsaw Pact and Yugoslav republics also saw few,
if any, concrete results.
In another initiative that resulted in embarrassing fail-
ure, the Islamist Erbakan’s WP-led coalition in 1996–97
set its sights on jointly developing an aircraft with Islamic
states of the D-8 Organization for Economic Cooperation.
Members include Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran,
Malaysia, Nigeria, Pakistan and Turkiye. Turkiye’s TAI
developed the prototype at its own expense, but no other
D-8 member showed any interest.35
During the same timeframe, Turkiye also sought to
improve its defence-industry cooperation with other
states, such as China, Israel, South Africa and South
Korea. South Africa turned out to be a disappointment
due to frequent diplomatic spats over the Kurds. Despite
high expectations, cooperation with China remained
confined to Turkiye acquiring technological and design
assistance for domestic production of artillery rockets
and short-range ballistic missiles.36 However, after root-
ing its defence capabilities in Western standards and
procedures, the Turkish defence industry soon encoun-
tered difficulties working with Chinese technology.
Chinese industrial culture and processes were found to
be incompatible, even inferior. This detrimental factor
revealed itself again in the mid-2010s, when Turkiye was
forced to backtrack on co-producing China’s FD-2000
(HQ-9) long-range surface-to-air missile system.37
Conversely, initiatives targeting South Korea were
more productive, so much so that over the course of the
subsequent decades Seoul became Ankara’s principal
non-Western defence-industry partner and weapons
supplier. Similarly, defence-industry cooperation and
arms supplies from Israel to Turkiye drove Turkish–
Israeli relations during the 1990s and 2000s, so much so
that Israel came to rival European and US contractors
in Turkiye’s defence procurement during that period.
The presumption that Israeli contractors operated free
of technology-transfer restrictions and embargoes led
many to welcome and treat Israel as the alternative
defence supplier that Turkiye had long sought. Yet the
illusion ended abruptly in 2009, when escalating ten -
sions and the poisonous rhetoric of the top political
leadership on both sides brought an end to all defence-
industry and procurement transactions.
In analysing Turkiye’s attempts during the 1990s
to take advantage of the favourable international envi -
ronment, two important observations stand out: firstly,
despite extensive efforts to diversify, Turkiye never
contemplated breaking its strong ties with the West, as
defence contractors from NATO states remained the
leading partners. Secondly, Russia never played a promi-
nent role in Turkiye’s search for alternatives. Sporadic
purchases of Russian equipment – e.g., BTR-80 armoured
vehicles, Mi-17 Hip utility helicopters, sniper rifles – were
not due to choice but happened as barter deals aimed at
closing Russia’s outstanding debt to Turkiye. 38 Several
attempts at promoting cooperation between defence
industries did not even come close to fruition, due among
other things to Russian hesitancy and rigidity toward
Turkiye’s technology-transfer preconditions.
Besides seeking out bilateral channels, Turkiye also
sought to join multinational defence programmes in the
1990s to sustain defence-industrial growth and diver -
sify supplier relationships. Those schemes kept Turkiye
within Western supply chains and allowed for the trans-
fer of valuable know-how and technologies that would
otherwise be more difficult to access through bilateral

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 17
interactions. Besides, as decisions were taken through
the consensus of several participating states, interna -
tional programmes brought the additional benefit of
minimising the risk of export restrictions and embar -
goes triggered by a single supplier’s rushed, arbitrary
and capricious decisions.
An early example is the 1989 European Stinger Project
Group, which Turkiye joined as a major partner. This
multinational cooperation helped Turkiye to set the
foundations of its rocketry and missile industries around
Roketsan. The deliveries continued unhindered during
the subsequent three decades, when most other con -
tracts signed on a bilateral basis faced serious challenges.
Turkiye’s keen interest in multinational programmes
reached its apex in the late-1990s when Ankara com -
mitted to buy the A400M after having been involved in
discussions on the European Future Large Aircraft pro-
ject since the start of the decade. While the programme
resulted in the 2013 delivery of A400M heavy transport
aircraft to the Turkish Air Force, this valuable foothold
in a European programme was also used to promote
Turkiye’s bid for EU membership and what it argued was
its solid stake and harmonious presence inside Europe.
Despite Europe growing in value as a defence-
industrial partner, the US nonetheless preserved
its status as the leading partner. Indeed, from the
late-1990s onwards, the most important element of
the US-Turkish defence cooperation centred on the
Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) programme – another inter -
national cooperative scheme which eventually led to
the F-35 combat aircraft. After Turkiye formally joined
the programme’s Concept Demonstration phase in
1999, the programme soon transitioned into its next
phase. Accordingly, from 2002 onwards, Turkiye
became a Level III participant with significant devel -
opment and production responsibilities. Participation
in the JSF programme drew on Turkiye’s desire to take
part in the design and development of a cutting-edge
fighter aircraft from scratch. It also generated a more
substantial workshare for Turkish industry than the
previous ‘nuts and bolts’ type of licence assembly of
Turkish F-16s. It also minimised the probability of a US
embargo of this critical and highly strategic modern
combat plane.
During the subsequent two decades of cooperation,
JSF generated the additional benefit of becoming a
showcase of successful and mutually beneficial defence
cooperation. It depicted strong and harmonious US–
Turkish defence relations, even when these were not
necessarily the case. In short, JSF became another axis
for Turkish foreign policy and a medium to mend
increasingly troubled US–Turkish defence relations.
(Ali Haydar Akkus/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images)
A Turkish Air Force A400M heavy transport aircraft evacuating Turkish citizen at Wadi Seidna air base in Sudan, 28 April 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
4. The Multipolar Order and the Expansion
of the Defence Industry
Turkish Foreign Policy Under the AKP
In 2002, the AKP rose to power. This did not have an
initial impact on the trajectory or conduct of Turkish
foreign policy, although the party would soon oversee
a more defiant and volatile foreign policy. The gradual
shift to a new, more multipolar world order would con-
tribute to this new outlook.
By the 2010s, as the AKP grew in confidence,
Turkiye aspired to exert ever-greater influence over
its regions of interest: the Eastern Mediterranean and
Levant, the Horn of Africa, North Africa, the Sahel and
Transcaucasia. This more proactive, assertive and defi -
ant foreign-policy trajectory gave rise to divergent agen-
das and, at times, dangerous confrontations. Although
Turkiye frequently clashed and quarrelled with Russia,
China and a whole variety of regional actors, disputes
with the country’s Western allies, and especially the US,
garnered the most attention. This was driven by diverg-
ing interests and policy agendas, but also differing
threat perceptions.39
With respect to the defence industry and acquisi -
tions, Turkiye under the AKP continued to seek self-
sufficiency. Contrary to the general perception in the
rest of Europe and the US, this goal was not pursued in
isolation from the Western defence ecosystem. Indeed,
relations with Western counterparts at the main plat -
form, system and subsystem levels continued una -
bated. Yet there were shifts in how Turkiye approached
defence-industry development. From 2004 onwards,
the model of joint ventures with foreign partners was
abandoned in favour of local prime contractors being
chosen to pursue so-called indigenous products and
solutions. Notably, some of those local projects incor -
porated technological and industrial partners from the
West, plus partners such as South Korea.
The importance attached to international programmes
remained steady, but Turkiye had limited success in
joining them. This stemmed, in part, from Turkiye’s
volatile foreign policy, reinforced by the AKP’s virulent
rhetoric. The only exception in this regard – a 2018 team-
ing between French, Italian and Turkish companies to
develop Europe’s next-generation missile defence systems
– fell prey to French unease over Turkiye’s actions in Syria
and the Eastern Mediterranean.40 To make matters worse,
Turkiye’s implacable insistence on purchasing the stan-
dalone41 S-400 air-defence systems from Russia resulted
in Turkiye’s expulsion from the F-35 JSF programme. The
expulsion had particular symbolic significance, as the
project had been presented for decades as the bulwark
and proof of strong American–Turkish defence relations.
There were also material impacts, as the Turkish defence
industry lost an industrial mainstay upon which several
key development and production projects were built.
Peaking Defence Exports
Throughout the 2010s, multiple projects aimed at devel-
oping indigenous designs and products began to yield
concrete results. The newly available platform and sys -
tem solutions provided the Turkish military with cut -
ting-edge capabilities tailored to its needs. Additionally,
several of those indigenous solutions proved attractive
among export customers, for several reasons.
Firstly, they reflected Turkiye’s accumulated military
experience fighting the PKK in diverse (mountainous to
desert to urban) environments. Turkish-made uncrewed
aerial vehicles (UAVs) such as the Anka and Bayraktar TB2,
direct-attack munitions and a wide range of armoured-
vehicle designs could therefore claim to be battle proven.
Secondly, Turkiye adhered strictly to NATO standards
in developing and producing those systems, which
reflected on the performance and quality standards
and ensured superior and reliable solutions over non-
Western alternatives (e.g., Chinese or Russian). A third
factor was the relative cost efficiency of Turkish defence
solutions. A fourth element was effective and quick after-
sale support, as well as training provided prior to and
after delivery. And fifthly, Turkish defence products
were offered with few or no political strings attached.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 19
Turkish authorities applied export restrictions, but
those related predominantly to determining which
states could receive Turkish defence equipment rather
than restrictions on specific types of equipment. Indeed,
there are examples of exports being denied or sus -
pended, including the non-delivery of MRTP 20 patrol
boats to Egypt following the 2013 coup there. Turkish
authorities insist the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA)
has in place strict case-by-case internal checks and
reviews.42 But, bearing in mind the silence of Turkish
authorities in the face of criticisms about Turkish-
supplied UAVs being used against non-combatants in
Ethiopia, Mali, Somalia and elsewhere, it is question -
able if Turkiye has the proper legislation or enforcement
mechanisms to restrict how, where and against whom
the recipients can use their Turkish-supplied equip -
ment.43 If not properly addressed and regulated, the
perception of the unrestricted and unregulated provi -
sion of Turkish weaponry may become a liability and
hinder Turkish foreign-policy goals.
Such criticisms notwithstanding, the growing capabil-
ity and exports of the defence industry provide Turkiye
with greater leverage in its foreign policy. One dimension
of such augmented influence involves Turkish defence
contractors such as ASELSAN setting up joint-venture
companies. Several such entities, aimed at providing
technical and technological assistance and carrying out
joint or license production, have been established dur -
ing the last two decades in Asian, Middle Eastern and
North African states. Among those are Azerbaijan,
Jordan, Malaysia, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the UAE.
Besides ASELSAN, armoured-vehicle manufacturer
FNSS and system integrator STM display a willingness
to share their expertise and industrial capabilities with
their export customers by offering substantial in-country
workshare when required. Consequently, as interest in
Turkish defence products soars, the production and tech-
nology/know-how transfer outlets providing the recipi-
ents with significant benefits also function as soft power
instruments. In doing so, they present Turkiye with a
golden opportunity to take advantage of arms exports to
advance its foreign-policy goals and agenda. This obser-
vation applies particularly to the export of UAVs to recip-
ients across Africa, Central Asia and the Middle East.
Accordingly, Qatar – Turkiye’s closest ally in the
Middle East – became the inaugural export customer
of Turkish-made UAVs. The partnership began in 2012
when Qatar ordered hand-launched mini-UAVs from
Baykar, followed by procurement of six Bayraktar TB2
armed UAVs in 2018. This marked TB2’s first export suc-
cess, and the transaction resulted in rapid development
of bilateral relations against the backdrop of Qatar’s iso-
lation by Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Qatar and Turkiye
developed a close alliance, expanding into political, eco-
nomic and military spheres incorporating other defence
hardware, such as naval vessels and land vehicles.
In January 2019, Ukraine became the next customer
of Turkish UAVs. Following the delivery of six TB2s
to its air force in March 2019, an additional order was
placed for the Ukrainian navy. Thus, Turkiye became
one of the first NATO members that delivered lethal
military equipment to Ukraine before the Russian inva-
sion. Meanwhile, Ukraine contributed to Turkiye’s
defence projects with its robust engine industry:
Ivchenko Progress provided turboprop engines for
Bayraktar Akıncı heavy-combat UAVs, while another
Ukrainian company, Motor Sich, signed a contract for
turboshaft engines destined for TAI’s T929 ATAK II
attack helicopter.
In 2020, Libya and Azerbaijan also acquired TB2 UAVs,
although the specific quantities remain undisclosed. 44
The introduction of armed UAVs in both countries signif-
icantly influenced the political and strategic landscapes
and altered the course of conflicts in both cases.
Throughout the 2020s, Turkiye’s defence exports saw
a rapid surge, with Turkish-made UAVs prominently
featured, garnering attention for their effectiveness (Nina Liashonok/ Ukrinform/Future Publishing via Getty Images)
Ukrainian soldiers push a Bayraktar TB2 at the Kulbakino air base
during Exercise Sea Breeze 2021, 30 June 2021

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
in conflicts in Idlib, Syria; Libya; Nagorno–Karabakh,
Azerbaijan; the Russia–Ukraine war; Tigray, Ethiopia;
and beyond. Additionally, UAV exports to several
Eastern European NATO allies bolstered Turkiye’s posi-
tion within the alliance and provided significant leverage
in its otherwise strained relationship with some allies.
Early 2021 saw an expansion of Turkiye’s UAV
exports. Tunisia signed a contract for Anka-S UAVs, fol-
lowed by reports of Morocco ordering Bayraktar TB2s.
Additionally, Hungary displayed notable interest in
Turkish systems, and Poland signed a contract for TB2s.
The latter’s purchase was Turkiye’s biggest defence
export to a European state at that time. The Polish order
for TB2s coincided with Turkiye’s application to partici-
pate in a project to supply Ukraine with UAVs through
the Permanent Structured Cooperation, a framework for
EU-wide defence and security cooperation. Yet Cyprus,
France and Greece vetoed this offer. 45 Nonetheless,
examples such as this one clearly illustrated the worth
of defence exports at the service of foreign policy at bilat-
eral as well as multilateral levels. Interestingly, whereas
defence-equipment orders traditionally serve foreign-
policy objectives, the use of defence exports to influence
foreign relations signified a dramatic turnabout in the
interaction between foreign policy and defence trade and
industry. However, this reversal of fortunes came with
risks and the potential for grave mistakes.
Having experienced remarkable expansion in defence
exports, industry and authorities are under intense pres-
sure to sustain this growth. The pressure to export at all
costs risks negative repercussions in bilateral relations
with certain states. It also carries the danger of tainting
Turkiye’s image internationally. Hence, the imperative to
balance increased sales with the preservation of Turkiye’s
bilateral ties and favourable image. In this sense, supply-
ing weapons to one party risks damaging relations with
its rivals. Examples abound of Turkiye finding itself in
the middle of conflicts – such as Ethiopia–Tigray–Egypt,
Morocco–Algeria, and Tajikistan–Kyrgyzstan – as a
result of its UAV exports.46
To make matters worse, not all Turkish policymak -
ers and decision-makers – especially those with purely
political, non-defence professional backgrounds – are in
a position to grasp the direct linkage between defence
exports and the responsibility of exporting governments.
This danger is evidenced by a former Turkish foreign
minister suggesting that, as Bayraktar TB2 UAVs are
produced by a private company, they did not constitute
arms sales between the Turkish state and the recipient
countries. This position ignores the fact that, through leg-
islation and procedures, the ultimate responsibility for
aligning defence exports with foreign-policy goals rests
with the Turkish MFA. Although the MND processes
the military aspects of transfers, in practice the Defence
Industries Agency ( Savunma Sanayii Başkanlığı , SSB)
oversees defence-technology aspects, especially if local
production or transfer of technology are involved. Senior
officials have affirmed rigorous enforcement of this pro-
cess, whereby the final decision on which states should
receive Turkish defence products is made by the MFA.
However, there may always be instances in which
this is not the case, particularly concerning defence con-
tractors with close ties to the government and its top
leadership. The sale of UAVs and other defence systems
to Ukraine before and after the start of the war with
Russia in 2022 may have been the result of calculated
deliberations, yet it is difficult to ascertain that all UAV
exports take place with the knowledge and consent of
all relevant authorities and organisations.
With an increasing number of defence contractors with
intimate ties to Turkiye’s ruling party47 – combined with
overwhelming pressure from the government, public and
industry to export ever more – the integrity and effective-
ness of the export-control mechanism is at risk of being
compromised.48 Consequently, there is a risk that a rapidly
growing defence industry may exert an oversized influence
on foreign policy and lead to detrimental outcomes for the
country’s foreign-policy goals and national interests.
A related risk concerns the overconfidence caused by
cutting-edge indigenous defence equipment reaching
maturity. Should this foster perceptions that conflicts
are swift and of low cost, it could encourage greater
militarism and adventurism by emboldened militaries
and publics alike. Indeed, Ankara’s conduct of foreign
policy in the late-2010s went through a more militarised
and assertive phase, which became particularly visible
in disputes over the Aegean, Eastern Mediterranean,
Libya and Syria.49 Fortunately, after realising the extent
of adverse repercussions and complications, Ankara
soon reversed its policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 21
Another example of how Turkiye’s defence industry
and foreign policy are intertwined concerns export and
technology restrictions, including official and unofficial
embargoes. Ever since the 1975 US arms embargo on
Turkiye, Turkish decision-makers have claimed a sense
of injustice resulting from their treatment by allies.
More insidious, perhaps, are examples of concealed US
restrictions on the sale of certain categories of equip -
ment and capabilities since 2003. These have seriously
strained bilateral relations between Turkiye and the US.
Beginning with the US invasion of Iraq, Turkiye and
the US have had increasingly divergent positions and
objectives on issues such as the status of the Kurds – first
in northern Iraq, then in northern Syria. The first signs of
US foot-dragging began to emerge in response to Turkiye’s
requests for weaponised UAVs (Predator and Reaper) for
use against the PKK inside and across Turkish borders.
Whereas similar UAVs were already supplied to the UK,
the US kept Turkiye’s request in limbo for years and cited
the restrictions imposed by the Missile Technology Control
Regime. This did nothing other than fuel Turkish scepticism
of Washington’s support for Ankara’s fight against the PKK.
A more dramatic test came in 2013, when Ankara selected
a Chinese contractor for a multibillion-dollar air- and
missile-defence tender. This decision overlooked foreign-
policy and alliance dimensions, and it also neglected the
challenges of technology transfer from a non-Western
supplier.50 Both NATO and a number of allied states led by
the US were furious. NATO’s outright refusal to integrate
Chinese systems into the Alliance’s joint air/missile defence
architecture, as well as threats of sanctions against the
Turkish defence industry, forced Ankara to cancel the deal.
The episode undermined Turkiye’s foreign-policy stature
with no political, financial, operational or industrial benefits.
More gravely, Western perceptions toward Turkiye shifted,
marking the beginning of a loss of confidence in AKP
leadership among Turkiye’s NATO allies which, fueled by
other policy disagreements, has not recovered.
In retrospect, it could be comfortably argued that
Turkiye’s decisions to buy defence equipment and its desire
to further develop its defence industry no longer provided
leverage in the service of its foreign policy. Instead, spats
over defence equipment began exerting negative influ -
ence over bilateral relations. To make matters worse, US–
Turkiye, as well as NATO–Turkiye, relations proceeded
poorly during this period over divergent policy agendas
and interests in the Eastern Mediterranean, Libya and
Syria. Therefore, particularly for US–Turkish relations,
tensions at the foreign-policy level were also harming
defence trade and defence-industry cooperation. Hence, a
vicious cycle of adverse foreign-policy and defence-policy
tensions have further damaged the relationship.
Although frictions between Turkiye and the US were
still manageable, the Turkish decision in 2017 to buy
S-400 missile systems from Russia was the proverbial
‘straw that broke the camel’s back’. Even when factor -
ing in Turkiye’s perception of a multipolar international
system, and acknowledging the AKP leadership’s loss
of confidence in its Western allies in the immediate
aftermath of the July 2016 coup attempt, the S-400 deci-
sion was difficult to comprehend and justify. Based on
their similar experience with a Chinese system only
four years ago, Turkish decision-makers should have
been aware of the political and operational complexi -
ties of their decision, and the ways in which it could
jeopardise Turkiye’s defence cooperation with the West.
Conventional wisdom suggests that the Turkish gov-
ernment’s insistence on a standalone configuration, cou-
pled with the absence of any benefits for the Turkish
industry – marking the first such deal without industrial
cooperation or workshare in over three decades – could
be attributed to political deliberations and judgments
overriding operational and industrial realities. In other
words, this decision reflected the ultimate prioritisation
of foreign-policy considerations over operational and
industrial factors. Consequently, Turkiye’s political gains
(if any) aside, the consequences were dire for Turkiye’s
defence industry. Being expelled from the F-35 pro -
gramme cost Turkish industry significantly, with some
estimates suggesting over USD12 billion in lost revenue.51
The wider loss of opportunities and capability resulting
from being excluded from the largest and most prestig-
ious Western defence-industry programme cannot be cal-
culated. Furthermore, the S-400/F-35 episode has proven
that multilateral projects did not provide watertight guar-
antees against sanctions and embargoes when faced with
extreme circumstances such as buying a strategic system
from a rival state. A project that could have been cited as
the basis of strong American–Turkish relations has thus
become a major liability between the two countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
Conclusion
Turkiye’s foreign- and defence-policy changes were
based on shifts in international systems and domes -
tic power distribution. Following the founding of the
republic in 1923, the country’s orientation towards the
West remained not only a political and strategic choice,
but a manifestation of an all-out effort to westernise
the country by the Republican elite. It constituted the
external aspect of a herculean effort to transform the
state, society and politics. During the inter-war period,
those elites considered ‘the West’ to be Europe, primar-
ily. And the political elite pursued admission into the
European state system as a means to achieve security.
After the Second World War, the US gradually replaced
Europe as the centre of Turkiye’s westernisation efforts.
Consequently, Ankara sought an organic presence in
the US-led transatlantic security community.
For much of the Cold War and beyond, Turkish stra-
tegic choices incorporated strong Atlanticist tenden -
cies. As the Cold War ended, Ankara enjoyed a rather
brief ‘European’ moment when the Turkish Parliament
voted down a motion that would have allowed the US
to deploy troops on Turkish territory for its 2003 inva -
sion of Iraq. The 2008 global financial crisis significantly
weakened the West’s appeal as an economic, political
and strategic centre. This came at a time when a new
political elite with Islamist roots was on its way to con -
solidating its hold on power in Turkiye. Devoid of west-
ernisation as an ideological driver, Turkiye’s foreign
policy was marked by a shift away from institutional
links to pragmatic, transactional and highly person -
alised interaction with the West. Consequently, the
ebb and flow in Turkiye’s relations with the West had
immediate ramifications for its foreign policy, strategic
choices and arms acquisition.
Since the 2000s, Turkiye’s perception has been that
the international system has gradually become more
multipolar as power has shifted towards Asia, and as
Russia and China have emerged as challengers to the
so-called rules-based international order. As a result,
Turkiye has perceived that good relations with Russia
and China are an opportunity to expand its autonomy
in foreign policy and pursue national interests without
fearing abandonment by its Western allies.
This fear of abandonment has also been alleviated
by the expansion of Turkiye’s defence-industrial capac-
ity. In this regard, the multipolar system has provided
both opportunities and risks. Turkiye uses availability
of willing partners to prop up its defence-industrial
capabilities, as it did during the inter-war years. During
the bipolar world of the Cold War, Turkiye had initially
given up on its defence-industrial development in line
with its absolute dependence on the US. This proved
to be a short-term choice, even though it would have
been difficult to find a willing partner to help Turkiye
develop its indigenous defence-industrial capacity
after the Second World War. The abandonment by the
US during the Cyprus Crisis was a wake-up call with
respect to defence industrialisation. However, pro -
gress was modest until willing partners emerged in the
1980s. Ironically, one of those partners was the US. As
the defence-industrial capabilities of Turkiye improved,
Ankara began to use the opportunities presented by the
new multipolar world order. This explains why Turkiye
did not see any problem in cooperating with China or
buying weapons from Russia.
However, the war on Ukraine has again significantly
altered Turkiye’s perceptions of the international sys -
tem. Although Turkiye’s relationship with Russia and
China began with the ascendancy of the new political
elites in Turkiye, the war on Ukraine has undeniably
narrowed Turkiye’s options. Turkiye responded by
embracing its traditional Western allies, while keeping
Russia at arm’s length. This shift was also reflected in
defence-industrial relations. Before the war, Turkish
officials could openly express the possibility of defence-
industrial cooperation with Russia. That has become a
counterproductive statement. Hence, Turkiye’s inter -
est has grown in defence-industrial cooperation and
programmes run under the auspices of NATO, or
other mechanisms such as the Organisation for Joint

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 23
Armament Cooperation. Combined with its financial
difficulties, Turkiye is seeking to mend its foreign policy
and defence-industrial relations with its Western part -
ners. While Europe is likely to take precedence in this
new endeavour, a recovery in relations with the US can-
not be ruled out. A promising sign was congressional
approval in January 2024 of Turkiye’s request to buy 40
new F-16C/D Block 70 aircraft and 79 Viper upgrade kits
for existing F-16s. This will be the first major defence
deal between Turkiye and the US since the decision to
expel Turkiye from the F-35 programme.
It should be noted that two issues remain as potential
obstacles on the way to further normalisation in Turkish-
American defence and defence industry ties. The first
one is the uncertainty arising from the S-400 systems
purchased from Russia. The US Congress regards
them as an impediment to further progress in bilateral
relations. The obstructive role that the US Congress
consequently played in the recent F-16 order constitutes
the second major impediment. The F-16 experience
caused exasperation and fatigue in Ankara, which may
no longer view buying American defence products as
worth the hassle of the congressional approval process.
Alternatively, if Turkiye and Europe (not necessar -
ily the EU) could redefine their relations by adjusting
to the new geopolitical landscape, this may unlock the
huge potential for defence-industry cooperation, which
would be mutually beneficial. Considering France’s ini-
tial firm stand against letting the EU harness the Turkish
defence industry in its efforts to beef up Ukrainian
military capabilities, such cooperation stands a better
chance either within the institutional context of NATO
or on a bilateral basis with individual European coun -
tries within or without the EU.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
Notes
1 Steven A. Cook, ‘Trump Is the First President to Get Turkey
Right’, Council on Foreign Relations, 13 August 2018, https://
www.cfr.org/blog/trump-first-president-get-turkey-right-0;
Richard N. Haass, ‘The West Must Face Reality in Turkey’,
Project Syndicate, 15 August 2018, https://www.project-
syndicate.org/commentary/turkey-broken-relationship-with-
the-west-by-richard-n--haass-2018-08.
2 Daniel Pipes, ‘Who Lost Turkey?’, The Weekly Standard, 13
October 2014, https://web.archive.org/web/20181216024346/
https://weeklystandard.com/daniel-pipes/who-lost-turkey.
3 Bülent Yilmazer, Türkiye’de Havacılık Sanayii Tarihi [The
History of the Aviation Industry in Turkiye] (Ankara:
Monch Yayincilik, 2012), pp. 39–45; Serhat Güvenç and Dilek
Barlas, ‘ Atatürk’s Navy: Determinants of Turkish Naval
Policy, 1923–38’, Journal of Strategic Studies, 2003; Dilek
Barlas and Serhat Güvenç, ‘To Build a Navy with the Help
of Adversary: Italian–Turkish Naval Arms Trade, 1929–32’,
Middle Eastern Studies, vol. 38, no. 4, October 2002, pp.
143–69, https://doi.org/10.1080/714004485.
4 Weber calls Turkiye ‘the evasive neutral’ whose ‘diplomacy
was a brilliant accomplishment by all standards except
those of honesty and integrity’, Frank G. Weber, The Evasive
Neutral: Germany, Britain and the Quest for Turkish Alliance
in the Second World War (Columbia: University of Missouri
Press, 1979), p. 219.
5 Onur Isci, ‘Turkey at a Crossroads: The Soviet Threat and
Postwar Realignment, 1945–1946’, Diplomatic History, vol. 47,
no. 4, 16 August 2023, pp. 624–25, https://doi.org/10.1093/dh/
dhad039. For a revisionist interpretation that claims Turkish
decision-makers deliberately exaggerated the Soviet threat
to manipulate public opinion, see Behlül Özkan, ‘The 1945
Turkish-Soviet Crisis: Devising a Foundational Myth for
Turkish Foreign Policy’, Russia in Global Affairs 18(2), April–
June 2020, pp. 156–187.
6 Serhat Güvenç and Mesut Uyar, ‘Lost in Translation or
Transformation: The Impact of American Aid on the Turkish
Military’, Cold War History, 22(1), 2021, pp. 59–77; Uğur
Ermiş and Günseli Gümüşel, ‘Why the Turkish Defense
Industry Between 1919 and 1950 Failed?’, Defense & Security
Analysis, 39(1), 2023, pp. 1–14.
7 Levent Kalyon, Türkiye’nin Savunma Politikaları Üzerine:
Kırmızı Kim? [Turkey’s Defence Policies: Who is Red?]
(Ankara: Nobel Yayın Dağıtım, 2010), p. 171.
8 ‘Milli Müdafaa Vekaleti İlmi İstişare ve Araştırma Kurulu
Teşkiline Dair Kanun’ [The Law on the Establishment of the
Scientific Consultation and Research Board of the Ministry
of National Defense], Pub. L. No. 7279 (1959).
9 Lyndon Johnson and İsmet İnönü, ‘President Johnson and
Prime Minister Inonu: Correspondence Between President
Johnson and Prime Minister Inonu, June 1964, as Released
by the White House, January 15, 1966’, Middle East Journal,
Summer 1996, vol. 20, p. 387.
10 Suha Bolukbasi, Turkish-American Relations and Cyprus
(Lanham: The University Press of America, 1988), pp. 115–120.
11 Several thousand examples of FN G-1 assault rifles
purchased with funds from the national budget were also
issued exclusively to brigades and divisions earmarked for
non-NATO contingencies in the late-1960s.
12 Serhat Güvenç and Mesut Uyar, ‘ Against All Odds: Turkish
Amphibious Operations in Cyprus, 20–23 July 1974’, in
Timothy Heck and B.A. Friedman (eds.), On Contested
Shores: The Evolving Role of Amphibious Operations in the
History of Warfare (Quantico: Marine Corps University
Press, 2020), pp. 302–305.
13 The National Security Council Institutional Files at the
Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library, ‘NSSM 227–US Security
Policy toward Turkey’, Box 37, 28 August 1975, https://www.
fordlibrarymuseum.gov/library/document/0398/1982289.pdf.
14 Çağlar Kurç, ‘Critical Approach to Turkey’s Defense
Procurement Behavior: 1923-2013’, unpublished dissertation,
The Graduate School of Social Sciences of Middle East
Technical University, Ankara, 2013, pp. 182–4.
15 The National Security Council Institutional Files at the
Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library, ‘NSSM 227–US Security
Policy toward Turkey’, Box 37, 28 August 1975, https://www.
fordlibrarymuseum.gov/library/document/0398/1982289.pdf.
16 Serhat Güvenç and Soli Özel, ‘US–Turkey Relations since
WWII: From Alliance to Transactionalism’, in Güneş Murat
Tezcür (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Turkish Politics, (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2022), p. 528.
17 Comptroller General of the United States, ‘The Defense and
Economic Cooperation Agreement–US Interests and Turkish
Needs’, 7 May 1982, pp. 1–2, https://www.gao.gov/assets/
id-82-31.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 25
18 William M. Arkin and Richard W. Fieldhouse, Nuclear
Battlefields: Global Links in the Arms Race (Cambridge:
Ballinger Publishing, 1985), p. 232.
19 ‘ A Farewell to Arms Makers’, The Economist, 22 November
1997, pp. 69–75.
20 Ryan K. Noppen, Ottoman Navy Warships 1914–18 (Oxford:
Osprey Publishing, 2015), pp. 6–7.
21 Ed Blanche, ‘Long-term Turkish Plans May Tighten Israeli
Ties’, Jane’s Defence Weekly, 5 February 1997, p. 5.
22 Şükrü Elekdağ, ‘2½ War Strategy’, Perceptions: Journal of
International Affairs, 1(4)(1996), https://dergipark.org.tr/en/
pub/perception/issue/49043/625641.
23 Turkiye’s first Islamist-led coalition government, in power
between 1996 and 1997.
24 Ofra Bengio, The Turkish-Israeli Relationship: Changing Ties
of Middle Eastern Outsiders (New York: Palgrave MacMillan,
2004), p. 100.
25 Ed Blanche, ‘The “Phantom Alliance”’, Jane’s Defence Weekly,
10 March 1999, pp. 53–57.
26 Evren Değer, ‘F-4 Projesi “Suriye’ye uyarı mesajı”’ [The F-4
Project Is Warning to Syria], Milliyet, 7 November 1995.
27 This version was subsequently named Ka-50-2 Erdoğan.
28 Levent Başara, ‘Taaruz Helikopteri Projesinde Son Duruma
bir Bakış’ [Review of Progress in Attack Helicopter Project],
Savunma ve Havacılık 73, 1999, pp. 32–34.
29 ‘Olmadı Mösyö Chirac’ [This Is Not the Way Monsieur Chirac],
Hürriyet, 24 March 2000. The then Turkish ambassador to Paris
Sönmez Köksal recalls president Chirac has never forgiven
prime minister Ecevit for his trashing of the Tiger as an inferior
defence product before cameras. ‘Chirac, Ecevit’i Hiç Affetmedi’,
[Chirac Has Never Forgiven Ecevit), Hürriyet, 20 October 2003.
30 Italian defence companies secured nearly every Turkish
order for arms between 2006 and 2007. Ümit Enginsoy,
‘Turkey Dependent on US Firms After Losing EU’, Hürriyet
Daily News, 17 January 2012, p. 11.
31 Burak Bekdil, ‘Top Brass Reshuffle Indicates Full
Government Control Over Turkey’s Arms Purchases’,
Hürriyet Daily News, 13 August 2013.
32 A US Embassy cable disclosed by Wikileaks points
specifically to this concern. ‘Decline in Turkish-
American Defense Industry Cooperation’, Embassy
in Ankara, 22 March 2006. http://wikileaks.org./
cable/2006/03/06ANKARA1513.html.
33 Defying the odds, Turkish shipyard Anadolu Tersanesi was
contracted for design consultancy by Hindustan Shipyard
Limited for the construction of five fleet support ships for the
Indian Navy in 2020. In April 2024, the Turkish shipyard’s
consultancy contract was terminated by the Indian Defence
Ministry reportedly due to tension between Turkiye and
India. ‘Indian MoD Cancels Fleet Support Ship Design
Contract With Turkish Shipyard’, https://www.defensemirror.
com/news/36553/Indian_MoD_Cancels_Fleet_Support_Ship_
Design_Contract_with_Turkish_Shipyard (13 April 2024).
34 Peter Dunai, ‘ Aselsan, Kazakhstan Engineering Team Up
to Work on Armoured Vehicles, Helos’, Jane’s Defence
Weekly, 30 May 2012, https://www.proquest.com/military/
docview/1017737902/D6DC4BE22C214FB8PQ/1?accoun
tid=148884&sourcetype=Trade%20Journals., Abbasova,
Vusala; “Kazakhstan, Türkiye Sign Military Cooperation
Plan for 2024” Caspian News, November 7, 2023, https://
caspiannews.com/news-detail/kazakhstan-turkiye-sign-
military-cooperation-plan-for-2024-2023-11-7-4/.
35 Muharrem Sarıkaya, ‘D-8 Uçağı’ [D-8 Airplane],
Hürriyet, 25 February 2001, https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/
muharrem-sarikaya-d-8-ucagi-39229085.
36 Sıtkı Egeli, ‘Turkey Embarks Upon Ballistic Missiles:
Why and How?’, Uluslararası İlişkiler , vol. 14, no. 56,
2017, pp. 16–17.
37 Sıtkı Egeli, ‘Making Sense of Turkey’s Air and Missile
Defense Merry-go-round’, All Azimuth, vol. 8, no. 1, 2019,
pp. 74–75.
38 Zülfikar Doğan, ‘Savunmada Sıkıntı’ [Defence Troubles],
Milliyet, 25 August 1994, p. 19.
39 Interview with senior diplomat, 24 November 2023.
40 Hüseyin Hayatsever, ‘SAMP/T’de Belirsizlik’ [Uncertainity
Around SAMP/T], Cumhuriyet, 27 September 2020, https://
www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/samptde-belirsizlik-1769119.
41 Turkiye argued that it would not incorporate the S-400
air defence system into its national radar network or into
overall NATO radar networks. Thus, the S-400 system
would depend only on its own radar systems to search
and track targets.
42 Interview with senior diplomat, 24 November 2023 .
43 Alper Coşkun, ‘Strengthening Turkish Policy on Drone
Exports’, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 18
January 2022.
44 Bilgehan Öztürk, ‘Bir Mıh, Bir Nal Kurtarır…’ [A
Nail Would Save a Horseshoe…], Kriter, March 2022,
https://kriterdergi.com/dosya-savunma-ve-guvenlik/
bir-mih-bir-nal-kurtarir.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26 Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
45 Stavros Ioannidis, ‘Greece, Cyprus, France, Block Bayraktar
Financing’, Ekathimerini, 17 February 2024, https://www.
ekathimerini.com/news/1231979/greece-cyprus-france-block-
bayraktar-financing/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter.
46 Fehim Taştekin, ‘Ripple Effects From Drone Sales Force
Turkey to Move Ethiopia Embassy’, Al-Monitor, 21 January
2022; Taştekin, Fehim, ‘ Are Turkish Drones Complicating
Disputes in Central Asia?’, Al-Monitor, 26 September 2022.
47 This is a characteristic of the AKP rule frequently
criticised by the main opposition party, CHP, as well as
other opposition circles in Turkiye. ‘Özgür Özel’den Aile
Devleti Çıkışı’ [Family State Criticism by Özgür Özel],
Haber Alternatif, 10 June 2020, https://haberalternatif.com/
ozgur-ozelden-aile-devleti-cikisi/.
48 Abdullah Esin, ‘Türkiye’de Savunma Sanayii ile
Otoriter Rejim İlişkisi’ [The Relationship Between
the Defence Industry and the Authoritarian
Regime in Turkiye], Birikim Dergisi, 26 July
2023, https://birikimdergisi.com/guncel/11460/
turkiyede-savunma-sanayii-ile-otoriter-rejim-iliskisi.
49 Murat Yeşiltaş, ‘Deciphering Turkey’s Assertive Military and
Defensive Strategy: Objectives, Pillars and Implications’,
Insight Turkey, 20(3), 2020, pp. 89–114.
50 Christina Lin, ‘ A New Eurasian Embrace: Turkey Pivots East
While China Marches West’, in Niv Horesh (ed.), ‘Toward
Well-Oiled Relations: China’s Presence in the Middle East
Following the Arab Spring’, (London: Palgrave MacMillan,
2015), pp 41–42.
51 Presidency of the Republic of Turkiye Investment Office,
‘F-35 Project to Earn Turkiye USD 12 Billion’, 10 May 2013,
https://www.invest.gov.tr/en/news/news-from-turkey/
pages/100513-turkey-f-35-jsf-program-partner-country.aspx.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Adapting Security: The Intersection of Turkiye’s Foreign Policy and Defence Industrialisation 27
The Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research (CFPPR) aims to develop agendas and pro-
mote policies that contribute to the peaceful resolution of international and inter-communal
conflicts, particularly in the regions surrounding Turkey, through analyzing and interpreting
contemporary policies from a critical, comparative, but also constructive, and peace-oriented
perspective. Together with All Azimuth, it provides a platform for homegrown international
relations and foreign policy research conceptualizations
The Centre for Applied Turkey Studies (CATS) at the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik (SWP)
in Berlin is funded by Stiftung Mercator and the Federal Foreign Office. CATS is the curator of
the CATS Network, an international network of think tanks and research institutions working on
Turkey. ‘National Defence Industry: From an Enabler of Turkey’s Pursuit of Strategic Autonomy
to a Bridge between Turkey and Europe’ is a project of CATS Network.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) is an international institute that owes
allegiance to no government. It is a registered UK charity and company. Its core objective is to
promote the development of sound policies that further global peace and security, and maintain
civilised international relations. IISS experts work from five offices in London, Washington DC,
Berlin, Bahrain and Singapore. They carry out fact-based research, convene and frame discus -
sions, and produce publications including The Military Balance, the definitive annual assessment
of defence capabilities, and Survival, the global politics and strategy journal. The IISS organises
and convenes conferences including the IISS Shangri-La Dialogue and IISS Manama Dialogue,
world-leading forums for the discussion of security issues. IISS research helps governments,
academics, the media and the private sector.
Bilkent
Center for Foreign Policy and Peace Research
İhsan Doğramaci Peace Foundation
