
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
This brief is part of a special series organized jointly by the University of
California Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC) and the
Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS). This analysis was originally
presented at the Conference on the Chinese National Innovation and
Techno-Industrial Ecosystems in Berlin, September 5–6, 2023.
Whole-of-Nation Innovation:
Does China’s Socialist System
Give it an Edge in Science
and Technology?
JEROEN GROENEWEGEN-LAU
Summary
China wants to become a science, technology, and manufacturing superpower by
upgrading and modernizing its industrial base and concentrating the nation’s innovation
resources around strategic priorities. However, it is difficult for the state to integrate
innovation resources because of the gap separating universities and research
organizations from industry, which impedes the translation of scientific output into
technological prowess. By contrast, Beijing has been much more successful at directing
industrial development. As a result, achieving a modernized industrial base is now the
dominant framework for Chinese policymakers as they pursue technological self-reliance.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
Key Findings
• Official calls for a new-style whole-of-
nation effort in China are primarily
aimed at directing Chinese researchers
and business to tackle key techno-
industrial bottlenecks. This sense
of urgency is necessary to overcome
barriers between academia and
industry.
• Public information does not support
the idea that Beijing has a shortlist of
top priorities that it is concentrating
the nation’s resources on.
• By refusing to outsource and
preferring to maintain a large share
of its economy in manufacturing
as opposed to services, China is
pursuing a different development
path than most developed countries.
This will impact trade relations with
other nations.
• Beijing’s fixation on national
sovereignty and self-reliance
complicates interaction with foreign
stakeholders. Its long-term vision
for China’s industrial and innovation
policy envisions a limited role for
foreign technology firms in the
Chinese market.
Introduction
On October 17, 2023, the United States issued
its second batch of export controls on advanced
computing and semiconductor manufacturing items
to China, expanding its “small yard, high fence”
approach to include more technologies and impact
more countries.1 The European Commission has
similar concerns about technology leakage but is
more circumspect in its response. Its economic
security strategy calls for partnering with allies,
promoting competitiveness, and protecting
interests “in a proportionate and precise way that
limits any negative unintended spillover effects
on the European and global economy.”2 The
Commission intends to complete a security review
of four critical technologies in 2024.3
China is a major catalyst of the global trend of
scientific and technological nationalism, with
its party and state leader Xi Jinping doubling
down on national security ever since he came to
power in 2012.4 For instance, in 2016 Xi called for
national self-reliance and self-empowerment (自
立自强) in key and core digital technologies at the
inaugural Work Conference for Cybersecurity and
Informatization, predating U.S. sanctions by several
years.5 Science, technology, and innovation (STI)
have become the main arena of global strategic
competition, Xi announced in 2022, adding that
the contest over the scientific and technological
commanding heights of the global economy has
never been more intense.6
Diverse geopolitical actors across the United
States, European Union, and China have different
interests, priorities, and approaches in securing key
technologies. But the net result is that science,
technology, and innovation have become increasingly
political. Policy is now driven by national security
concerns, which creates friction in international
networks. Joint publications between U.S. and
Chinese researchers are already declining.7

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
Chinese and Western firms face questions about
their loyalty at home and abroad, as well as
complex regulations for exporting data and goods
involving strategic or critical technologies.
To understand this trend, this brief offers a thorough
analysis of Beijing’s vision for its innovation and
industrial systems based on close readings of high-
level policy documents and commentaries.
Collectivizing Industrial Efforts
The Communist Party of China has a long history
of directing industrial development, combining
domestic goals of providing basic goods, jobs,
and economic growth with notions of self-reliance
and national security that emphasize international
competition. The notion of the “new-style
whole-of-nation” system (NSWN, 新型举国体制)
takes inspiration from this history. It has gained
prominence since the fourth plenum of the 19th
Central Committee in 2019 as Beijing seeks to
capitalize on the socialist system’s unique ability
to “concentrate power to do great things (集中力
量办大事).” The 14th Five-Y ear Plan of 2021-2025
presented the NWNS sysstem as a key component
of “the battle for key and core technologies.”
The NSWN concept refers back to the whole-of-
nation approach of the late 1960s and early 1970s,
which enabled China to develop nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles in the space of just a few
years, despite being cut off from its major source
of technological knowhow through the Sino-Soviet
split. Under Chairman Mao, the effort had been
overseen by the Central Special Commission
(中央专委), which was discontinued in the 1970s.
Similarly, President Xi set up a Central Science and
Technology Commission (中央科技委员会) in March
2023 to oversee the NSWN approach and reform
the Ministry of Science and Technology into its
supporting agency.
By centralizing control of STI in China, these
changes go against the central tenets of the
“reform and opening up” (改革开放) policy that
began in the late 1970s.8 These included the
depoliticization of science and technology, as well
as the devolution of power over resource allocation
to markets and local actors. Still, the presence of
a large and vibrant private sector distinguishes
the NSWN approach from its 1960s predecessor.
Acknowledging the importance of entrepreneurship
to innovation, Beijing looks to enlist the private
sector through a mixture of incentives, regulations,
and political steering. This structural tension in
China’s socialist market economy is summarized
by the ideal of “an efficient market and an effective
government (有效市场和有为政府).”9
A Network of Fitness Centers
to Break Local Barriers
To understand how China’s mixed economic
system works for innovation and industrial policy,
it helps to see the NSWN system as a variation of
the country’s national Olympic program. Sports
programs in China are discussed in terms of
a whole-of-nation system. Both China’s highly
successful Olympic programs and its current
effort to break foreign technological bottlenecks
combine training and grassroots competitions with
a multi-tiered national selection program focused
on outperforming international competitors. In
this approach, the state delegates the day-to-day
organization and refereeing of the program to
trusted partners.
In the NSWN system, objective external indicators
measure the program’s effectiveness. Absent
medal tallies, export volumes and values have
become the benchmark for industrial innovation.
Success in overseas markets makes a firm more
worthy of government support. Domestically,
Beijing allows foreign firms like Apple and
Tesla to sell products in a controlled setting
while monitoring the market share of domestic
frontrunners to assess their competitiveness.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
These mechanisms compensate for a lack of trust
in local data on the fitness of Chinese businesses,
and this “export discipline” targets firms as well
as local officials.10 In a previous phase of China’s
state-led development model, local officials had
wide room for policy experimentation, including
by launching industrial and innovation zones,
creating pilot and demonstration projects, and
allocating investments. However, this sometimes
led to local protectionism. The NSWN system is
part of a larger trend to restrict local discretion
in how these programs are implemented.
Too Many Stakeholders to
Concentrate
The whole-of-nation approach enables other actors
to vie for central government attention. Following
previous mission-oriented programs, it stands
to reason that the NSWN system would appoint
issue owners in a handful of technology areas who
would each bring together various stakeholders,
formulate benchmarks, allocate resources, assess
progress, and lobby Beijing for funding and
favorable policies.11
The NSWN system aligns with recommendations
by professors Yutao Sun and Cong Cao, who point
to more recent precedents, such as the National
Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund,
China’s development of high-speed rail, or the
16 science and technology megaprojects for the
2006 to 2020 period.12,13 The latter successfully
spearheaded BeiDou’s satellite navigation,
Huawei’s 5G next-generation mobile Internet,
and the C919 commercial aircraft, which were
supervised respectively under a military research
organization, a state-affiliated think tank, or a
state-owned enterprise (SOE).
These organizations are almost certainly lobbying
for state support in Beijing. It has become hard
for outsiders to read the outcome of these
negotiations.
For instance, a new batch of 15 science and
technology (S&T) megaprojects was announced
in the S&T Five-Y ear Plan for 2016-2020, to which
new-generation artificial intelligence was added
in 2017. Details on these megaprojects and their
relative centrality in the innovation chain would be
in the Science and Technology Mid- to Long-Term
Plan for the 2021-2035 period, but that plan was
never published. Using these limited resources,
Barry Naughton, Siwen Xiao, and Yaosheng Xu
do a remarkable job of puzzling together what the
NSWN system might look like.14
However, there is no public evidence to suggest
that this approach has become dominant. Chinese
commentators rarely discuss which technologies
should be prioritized on what grounds, how many
technologies China could realistically concentrate
resources on, or who should bring the nation
together in a specific technology area. As a result,
there is no current authoritative list of key and
core technologies—the best proxy is a list of 35
“stranglehold” technologies such as lithography
machines, operating systems, and aircraft engines
issued by a state-affiliated newspaper in 2016.
There is also no matching list of topic owners or
even institutional platforms for “national teams.”15
Instead, China’s innovation and industrial policy is
still fragmented across many partially overlapping
platforms and initiatives. Naughton, Xiao, and Xu
identify around 50 bottleneck and competitive-
advantage technologies. But this number is too
large and the technology areas are too big for
this to amount to an effective concentration of
resources. Analysis of research funding, investment
data, publications, and patents also does not show
a clear prioritization.
Instead of focusing on specific technologies and
sectors, public discussion on the NSWN focuses on
improving synergies between industry, universities,
and public research institutes (产学研融合).

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
The Slow Process of Mending Weak
Links in the Innovation Chain
Next to providing a benchmark for competitiveness,
the West has been a major source of science,
technology, and innovation that is fueling China’s
catching up. Now that China’s access to Western
STI is less secure and China is getting closer to the
global cutting edge, Beijing has repeatedly stated
that it wants to improve the domestic research
and development (R&D) pipeline from early-
stage research to mass production. The primary
contribution of the NSWN system is in making the
innovation chain more prominent.
Although China produces a growing portion of the
world’s top-cited research papers and patents, this
is not matched by a corresponding growth in total
factor productivity, indicating that much of this
research output is not influenced by downstream
industrial demand.16 Because China has been very
successful at scaling up proven technologies and
creatively adapting or re-inventing products that
were pioneered elsewhere, China’s issues with
technology diffusion primarily involve domestic
inventions. Most of the successes China can point
to have some degree of foreign inspiration.17,18
Digital giants in search, e-commerce, ride hailing,
and social networking started by translating U.S.
models to Chinese contexts. In hardware sectors
like solar panels, batteries, electric vehicles, smart
phones, and commercial drones, Chinese overseas
returnees and local entrepreneurs gained global
market share by building on ideas and components
pioneered elsewhere.19
If inventing something new is going from zero
to one and scaling up is going from one to 100,
China’s main successes are either early—close
to zero—or near the end—close to 100. The
largest challenge resides around the one, where
invention is slowly brought to scale. This structural
gap demonstrates the so-called “two-layers” (两
张皮) problem of a mismatch between academy
and industry. Although Beijing wants firms to
lead, Chinese firms typically avoid investing in
risky basic research, seeing this as a task for the
state, especially if the sector is of national strategic
importance. As a result, the gap between the
two layers remains wide. The National People’s
Congress noted this when it reviewed the Science
and Technology Progress Law in October 2023,
adding that many in knowledge institutions do
not sufficiently recognize the urgency of closing
this gap.20
Beijing has a range of instruments to address this
long-standing two-layers problem. Many of these
overlap with the NSWN system as they seek to
break silos in the interest of national development.
Together with industry, the state formulates and
funds open challenges for knowledge institutions
in a process known as “unveiling the list” (揭榜挂
帅). Further, local governments organize “innovation
associations” (创新联合体) where companies
are paired with universities and labs to tackle
technological needs. In addition, a new type of
more market-oriented, state-sponsored research
institute is emerging to facilitate technology transfer
(New R&D Institutes, 新型研发机构), while legacy
institutes are pressured to serve industrial and
strategic needs. Finally, reforms are being initiated
to grant inventors more ownership over patents, to
encourage state-employed researchers to become
more entrepreneurial.
This multifaceted approach to connecting the
innovation chain is piecemeal and slow because
the state is simultaneously seeking to centralize
control. As this plays out, public debates have
embedded the pursuit of technological self-reliance
into the larger question of the future of China’s
industrial development. These debates are now
considering a larger group of industries than those
involving high-end technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
Xi Wants a Complete, Advanced,
and Secure Industrial Base
The 14th Five-Y ear Plan (2021-2025) calls for building
a modern industrial base (现代产业体系), linking the
project to China’s goal of becoming a manufacturing
powerhouse (制造强国).21 Similar terms have been
used since at least the 17th Party Congress of 2007.
In May 2023, President Xi elaborated on the closely
related term of a “modernized industrial base” (现代
化产业体系). To build a modernized industrial base
that is complete, advanced, and secure, President
Xi told the Central Commission for Financial and
Economic Affairs (CCFEA) that China should make
use of scientific and technological revolutions,
capitalize on its industrial prowess, and promote
global innovation. Xi also argued that China should
not simply push out low-grade industries but
instead work to upgrade them.

This last remark is consistent with the leadership’s
emphasis on the “real economy.” President Xi
repeatedly warns against Chinese modernization
“losing touch with reality” (脱实向虚), for instance,
during his trip to Guangzhou in April 2023. Zheng
Shanjie, the director of China’s chief planning
agency, the National Development and Reform
Commission, elaborated on this in Qiushi, the
party’s main theoretical journal.22

Today’s modernized economies rely on
the real economy to generate growth and
remain resilient. One of the main reasons
some countries lost their lead or fell into
the so called “middle income trap” and
experienced long periods of stagnation is
their neglect of the real economy,
their failure to modernize their industrial
system. … Traditional industries make up
most of China’s manufacturing prowess.
We can’t simply push “low-grade industries”
out. Instead, we should guide and support
firms in traditional sectors to upgrade. …
The emerging industries are the pillars
of future development, but we shouldn’t
blindly pursue foreign novelty.
China should not let its manufacturing base be
hollowed out like the United States’, adds Cui Fan,
a professor at China’s University of International
Business and Economics and the director of
the research unit of the China Institute for WTO
Studies.23 Cui argues for including financial and
digital services that support industrial activity into
the definition of the “real economy” and excluding
only those activities that “directly create money with
money.” This is consistent with recent government
clampdowns on “the disorderly expansion of
capital,” particularly real estate speculation.
The insistence on including traditional industries
like steel, coal, and shipbuilding—as well as the
SOEs that dominate them—follows Communist
orthodoxy. It also seeks to hedge against an
escalating trade conflict with the West. Industrial
bases are important in times of crisis, as COVID-19
was a stark reminder. They are especially important
to China as global technological competition
intensifies, because China’s leverage is based less
on the uniqueness of its technologies and more
on its ability to produce large volumes quickly and
cheaply. Replacing China’s global role in critical
raw materials, solar panels, active pharmaceutical
ingredients, and telecommunications equipment
would be an economic challenge for the West
rather than a technological one. To keep the cost
of decoupling high for foreign governments and
multinationals, China needs to retain its central
position in global supply chains.
However, due to rising labor costs, the contribution
of manufacturing to China’s gross domestic product
(GDP) declined 6 percent between 2008 and 2020
to 26.3 percent, calculates Professor Cui. After,
Beijing was able to arrest the decline but only
slightly, growing the figure 1.1 percent in 2021 and
0.3 percent in 2022, which inadvertently caused
China’s debts to balloon.24 Beijing’s insistence on
boosting industrial production also demotes other
national goals, such as making China less reliant
on export markets, reducing carbon emissions, and
raising consumption and quality of life under the
rubrics of “common prosperity” (共同富裕).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
Policy Implications
The new-style whole-of-nation system and the
modernized industrial base represent two partially
overlapping responses to the risk of foreign
technological containment. Whereas the former
focuses on generating intellectual property through
strengthening the innovation chain, the latter seeks
to upgrade the Chinese manufacturing sector to
climb up the global value chain. The two policies
side-by-side expose the contradictions of China’s
two goals of technological self-reliance and
economic de-risking.
The relative importance of the modernized industrial
base in the Chinese-language debate is clear by the
recent flurry of publications, including by leading
ministries and think tanks. These writings consistently
call for consolidating leads, upgrading traditional
industry, and accelerating innovation through the
NSWN system, in that order. The tensions between
these goals are rarely discussed. This paper highlights
some of the more obvious contradictions, such
as concentrating resources on all technologies of
possible importance. The program also creates
changing state-market relations, which is leading to
tasking the most conservative stakeholders—such as
military organizations, legacy research labs, state-
owned enterprises, and public financial institutions—
with organizing innovation and nurturing a start-up
scene. China’s policies encounter further contradictions
in their attempts to upgrade manufacturing capacity
without outsourcing polluting and labor-intensive
industry segments to other countries and in promoting
exports, international collaboration, and in-bound
investments as a means to reduce foreign reliance.
Some degree of ambiguity may work in Beijing’s
favor, as it provides flexibility and cover in achieving
its de-risking and self-reliance aims. However,
implicit restrictions on the public debate also
blunt the recommendations of policy advisors.
A glaring absence in the emerging vision is that
of large private and foreign companies. Despite the
large contributions of tech giants and multinational
corporations to China’s past innovation and
productivity gains, as well as the importance of
overseas returnees in China’s innovation landscape,
the outside world features either as a source of
risk—through the technological strangleholds—or as
an export market whose absorption of more and
more Chinese goods validates the country’s progress.
Foreign firms may be able to convince local
Chinese interlocuters that their contributions should
be recognized and accommodated, especially if
their branches are well integrated in local value
and innovation chains. This approach is likely to
succeed some of the time, and in some places
and sectors. But the overarching long-term vision
for innovation and industrial policy that currently
dominates in Chinese policy circles follows the
logic of China’s dual circulation strategy (双循
环), which primarily aims to compartmentalize and
reduce China’s exposure to external shocks.25 Even
though China may never realize this vision in full, it
is wise for Western stakeholders to take it seriously
and formulate their own de-risking strategies.
Conclusion
Based on China’s track record, the NSWN
approach will be most successful in areas
where there is an established technology
that China can emulate—such as atomic
bombs, navigation satellites, space stations,
or high-speed rail. Lithography equipment
may also fit this mold. By contrast, China’s
successes in solar panels, electric vehicles,
telecommunication equipment, and various
digital platforms have relied much more on
private entrepreneurship. Looking forward,
the first policy by the Central Science
and Technology Commission focuses
on “future industries,” many of which
require corporate initiative, not least
artificial intelligence.26 The key metric for
success of the NSWN approach will be
in whether it can spur innovation by tech
entrepreneurs. So far, that looks unlikely.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
Endnotes
1. “Public Information on Export Controls Imposed on Advanced
Computing And Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the
People’s Republic Of China (PRC) in 2022 and 2023,” Bureau
of Industry and Security, U.S. Department of Commerce,
November 6, 2023, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-
bis/newsroom/2082.
2. “An EU approach to enhance economic security,” European
Commission, June 20, 2023, https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_23_3358.
3. “Commission recommends carrying out risk assessments on
four critical technology areas: advanced semiconductors,
artificial intelligence, quantum, biotechnologies,” European
Commission, October 3, 2023, https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_4735.
4. Katja Drinhausen and Helena Legarda, “Comprehensive
National Security” unleashed: How Xi's approach shapes
China's policies at home and abroad, Mercator Institute for
China Studies (MERICS) report, September 15, 2022,
https://merics.org/en/report/comprehensive-national-
security-unleashed-how-xis-approach-shapes-chinas-
policies-home-and.
5. Xi Jinping, “Speech at the Work Conference for Cybersecurity
and Informatization,” China Copyright and Media, April
19, 2016, https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.
com/2016/04/19/speech-at-the-work-conference-for-
cybersecurity-and-informatization/.
6. “Xi Jinping: Accelerate the construction of a scientific
and technological power to achieve high-level scientific
and technological self-reliance and self-reliance,” China
Government Website, April 30, 2022, https://www.gov.cn/
xinwen/2022-04/30/content_5688265.htm.
7. Brian Owens, “Why is China’s high-quality research footprint
becoming more introverted?” Nature, November 29, 2023,
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-03762-4.
8. Barry Naughton, Tai Ming Cheung, et al., Reorganization
of China’s Science and Technology System, University of
California Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation
working paper, August 22, 2023, https://ucigcc.org/
publication/reorganization-of-chinas-science-and-
technology-system/.
9. Xin Gu, “有效市场” 与 “有为政府”：科学与艺术的结合
(‘Efficient Market’ and ‘Conditionally Active Government’:
Combination of Science and Art),” SSRN, March 31, 2021,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3816417.
10. Gregory C. Allen, China’s New Strategy for Waging the
Microchip Tech War, Center for Strategic and International
Studies report, May 3, 2023, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
chinas-new-strategy-waging-microchip-tech-war.
11. Mariana Mazzucato, “Mission-oriented innovation policies:
challenges and opportunities,” Industrial and Corporate
Change 27, 5, October 12 2018, 803–815, https://academic.
oup.com/icc/article/27/5/803/5127692.
12. Yutao Sun and Cong Cao, “Chapter 6: Organization - Mission-
Oriented Mega-Research-and-Development Programs,”
in The Political Economy of Science, Technology, and
Innovation in China: Policymaking, Funding, Talent, and
Organization (Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press, August 2023), 157-193, https://www.
cambridge.org/core/books/political-economy-of-science-
technology-and-innovation-in-china/organization/
F56CF4EA12315CFB1A4F66CFB6011B46.
13. Barry Naughton, The Rise of China’s Industrial Policy: 1978
to 2020, (Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Facultad de Economía, January 2021), https://ucigcc.
org/publication/the-rise-of-chinas-industrial-policy-1978-
to-2020/.
14. Barry Naughton, Siwen Xiao, and Yaosheng Xu, The
Trajectory of China’s Industrial Policies, University of
California Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation
working paper, June 02, 2023, https://ucigcc.org/publication/
working-paper/the-trajectory-of-chinas-industrial-policies/.
PRC Ministry of Education (教育部), “35 Key “Stranglehold”
Technologies (“卡脖子” 的35项关键技术),” translation by the
Center for Security and Emerging Technology, 2018 (trans.
May 13, 2021), https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/35-
key-stranglehold-technologies/.
15. Yuen Yuen Ang, Nan Jia, Bo Yang, and Kenneth G.
Huang, “China’s Low-Productivity Innovation Drive:
Evidence From Patents,” Comparative Political Studies,
November 2023, https://journals.sagepub.com/eprint/
KAZQCQPABG4VDVAXUNJA/full.
16. Emily S. Weinstein, “Beijing’s ‘re-innovation’ strategy is key
element of U.S.-China competition,” Brookings Institution,
January 6, 2022, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
beijings-re-innovation-strategy-is-key-element-of-u-s-china-
competition/.
17. Jeffrey Ding, “The diffusion deficit in scientific and
technological power: re-assessing China’s rise,” Review of
International Political Economy Volume 31, no. 1, March 13,
2023, 173-198, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0
9692290.2023.2173633.
18. Siping Luo, Mary E. Lovely, and David Popp, “Intellectual
returnees as drivers of indigenous innovation: Evidence from
the Chinese photovoltaic industry,” The World Economy 40,
no. 11, August 14, 2017, 2424-2454, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1111/twec.12536.
19. Cai Dafeng, “Law Enforcement Inspection Team of the
Standing Committee of the National People's Congress –
Regarding the Inspection of the Science and Technology
Progress Law of the People's Republic of China
Implementation status report—At the sixth meeting of the
Standing Committee of the 14th National People's Congress
on October 21, 2023,” The National People’s Congress of the
People’s Republic of China, October 31, 2023, http://www.npc.
gov.cn/npc/c2/c30834/202310/t20231031_432686.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
IGCC • MERICS • February 2024
Whole-of-Nation Innovation: Does China’s Socialist System Give it an Edge in Science and Technology?
Author
Jeroen Groenewegen-Lau is Head of Program of “Science, Technology and Innovation” at MERICS. Prior to that
he worked at “China Policy”, a Beijing-based research and advisory company. He set up the section education,
science and innovation at China Policy in 2017, and led it until December 2020. Jeroen spent over ten years in
China. He holds a master’s degree Languages and Cultures of China from Leiden University and wrote about
Chinese popular music in his PhD dissertation.
About IGCC
The UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC) is a network of researchers from across the
University of California and the Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore national labs who produce and use
research to help build a more peaceful, prosperous world. We conduct rigorous social science research on
international security, the environment, geoeconomics, nuclear security, and the future of democracy; help
to educate and train the next generation of peacemakers; and strive to ensure that what we are discovering
contributes to a safer world.
For more information: ucigcc.org
About MERICS
The Mercator Institute for China Studies (MERICS) was founded in 2013 by the German Stiftung Mercator to
strengthen knowledge and debate about China in Germany and Europe. With international researchers from
Europe, the United States and Australia, MERICS is currently the largest European research institute focusing
solely on the analysis of contemporary China and its relations with Europe and the wider world. MERICS experts
have a wide range of expertise on China, scientific qualifications and methodological skills. With its main
premises in Berlin, MERICS also operates an office in Brussels.
For more information: merics.org
