
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
The International Institute
for Strategic Studies
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine
War on National Cyber
Planning: A Survey of
Ten Countries
Greg Austin and Natallia Khaniejo
December 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Contents
 Executive Summary 3
Section 1: Introduction 5
Section 2: Continuity of Cyber Defence 6
Section 3: Implementing Basic Cyber Security 7
Section 4: Cyber Defence in Depth 9
Section 5: Defence Strategy and Plans 10
Section 6: Alliances and Partnerships 11
Section 7: Information Operations 13
Section 8: Implications 15
 Notes 16

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 3
Russia’s war against Ukraine has involved the most
extensive and continuous use of hostile cyber operations
by one state against another in history. As the war has
unfolded, cyber operations by both sides have become
increasingly prominent, with Russia stepping up cyber
attacks on the United States and allied countries. These
events have motivated other countries to shore up their
capabilities to defend against similar cyber operations
in the future.
This paper explores how ten countries – Canada,
Finland, France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands,
Poland, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the US –
have responded to the war in the cyber domain. Based
on analysis of government documents and public
statements, combined with a workshop held in Berlin
in October 2023, the authors have identified five take-
aways from the war.
Firstly, there is a recognition that the blurring of
boundaries between competition, crisis and war in
cyberspace requires a continuity of cyber defence.
Secondly, establishing the foundations for national
cyber security should be among a state’s top priorities,
and this requires continuous budget allocations to main-
tain it. Building on the basics of good cyber security,
the third takeaway is the significance of a broader and
more proactive cyber defence informed by the principle
of defence ‘in depth’. The fourth insight is that national
cyber defence is more easily achieved through effective
partnerships (between governments and the private
sector) and through alliances (with like-minded coun -
tries). Finally, influence operations are a growing and
significant challenge in cyberspace, with most of the
states surveyed introducing new measures to enhance
societal resilience against such operations.
The result has been a strong upsurge in institutional
reform and budget allocations for cyber missions. Even
in countries where the trajectory of policy reform and
investment was already quite pronounced before 2022
(such as in the US and the UK), important organisa -
tional adjustments have been announced, alongside
marked increases in budget allocation and modest to
large-scale expansion of human resources dedicated to
particular cyber missions.
Countries like Japan have realised that a more pro -
active approach to cyber defence is an inescapable real-
ity, and they are actively seeking ways to incorporate it
into their doctrine in a transparent manner. However,
in some European countries such as France, Germany
and the Netherlands, a more proactive approach to
cyber defence is contentious, as it could be perceived
as potentially aggressive. Nevertheless, the United
States’ concept of ‘persistent engagement’, including
‘hunt-forward’ operations, has growing appeal. All of
the countries reviewed have refined or stepped up the
restructuring of their cyber military assets, not only
for warfighting but also to ensure that in peacetime
the military elements reinforce continuous national
cyber defence.
The cyber defence of Ukraine has shown the impor -
tance of alliances. Many countries have therefore
enhanced their cyber diplomacy by fostering, expand -
ing and deepening partnerships. The American and
British view of a more proactive approach to achieving
continuity of cyber defence is likely to be progressively
adopted by more countries, especially their close allies.
The war has underlined the role of tech companies
as geopolitical actors, since they have made decisive
interventions in the war. Firstly, the direct provision
by these firms of cyber-security services and capabili -
ties has buttressed Ukraine’s cyber defence at critical
moments. Secondly, tech companies have brought
down Russia’s economic and reputational standing
by curtailing operations in the country following the
invasion. However, some countries, especially the US,
UK and EU members, have raised a number of politi -
cal concerns around the quasi-combatant role of these
private corporations in relation to the principles of
international humanitarian law.
Influence operations have become a much more
important focal point of policy as the Russian and
Executive Summary

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Ukrainian governments (along with their respective
state and non-state supporters) have fought to control
the narrative surrounding the war and its progress.
While information warfare of this kind is not a novel
concept or doctrine, cyber capabilities enable it to be
executed on a greater scale than what was previously
possible. Some countries surveyed, such as Sweden,
have invested in new government bodies to lead in this
area, while Poland has increased investment in this area
of policy. Most of the countries surveyed have adopted
whole-of-society approaches to defeating information
operations. Techniques include partnering with plat -
forms to introduce greater transparency and account -
ability mechanisms; educational initiatives to promote
digital literacy; increased calls for the attribution of
information operations; the use of cyber operations to
disrupt information operations; and working through
alliances to counter information operations. However,
only a few of the countries surveyed are carrying out all
of these measures, since most do not attribute informa -
tion operations.
Overall, most of the countries in this study have
made significant adjustments to national-security poli -
cies and cyber-policy planning. As a result, the profile
of national cyber capabilities is poised to become even
more prominent than it is today. China’s cyber opera -
tions and potential will become an important addi -
tional motivation to bolster national cyber defence.
The war has in some ways sharpened the will of lead -
ing governments to strengthen their commitment to a
whole-of-society approach to support national cyber
capabilities, defence and resilience. In Finland, this
is demonstrated in the government’s concept of total
national defence.
Further significant adjustments in national cyber
policy will continue to be made if Russia continues to
expand its cyber and information operations against
Ukraine and its allies.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 5
1. Introduction
As Canada’s defence minister observed in June 2023,
‘Putin’s war on Ukraine has reminded all of us that the
cyber domain is crucial to our national security’. 1 This
paper surveys ten countries to understand how they
have understood the impact of the cyber operations in
the Russia–Ukraine war. We look at Canada, Finland,
France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.
This research draws on statements of strategic policy,
including announced shifts on doctrine, force structure,
workforce development and spending. The analysis is
also based on the outcomes of a workshop held in Berlin
in October 2023. The authors take a broad view of strat-
egy and operations for the cyber domain, recognising
that many of the relevant polices and capabilities are
not military-owned and that cyber security in particular
requires a whole-of-society approach. The paper does
not cover the full gamut of the national-security aspects
of cyberspace such as shaping national industry policy.
While a key reference point for this paper is Russia’s
full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, the
authors also recognise that most of the states covered in
this report had already been upgrading their cyber pos-
tures in response to increasing cyber threats from Moscow
and other actors such as Beijing for over a decade prior.
In addition, while some of the announcements for cyber
upgrades following the invasion were prepared before the
invasion itself, the war has underlined the importance of
specific cyber defence and resilience measures for many
of the countries, and these are highlighted in this research.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
2. Continuity of Cyber Defence
The war has showcased that there is no clear demar -
cation between peace and war in cyberspace. There
is a blurring of the boundaries between competi -
tion, crisis and conflict, and countries experience a
steady state of at least ‘competition’ during peace -
time. They must therefore plan to build cyber defence
and resilience in a manner that accounts for this per -
petual state of tension. While many countries sur -
veyed had already recognised prior to February 2022
that increasing cyber security would require further
capability investment, the war has added urgency to
their efforts. The conflict has also made clear that a
purely reactive defensive position in cyberspace does
not suffice, and a more forward-leaning approach is
required. The blurring of boundaries means that states
can benefit by planning (through their strategies and
investments) for continuity of cyber defence across the
spectrum of conflict.
Some states also have a greater appreciation of the
value of adopting a more proactive approach to cyber
defence. They base this not only on the strength of
Ukrainian cyber defence since February 2022, but also
on Kyiv’s efforts at bolstering cyber resilience for almost
a decade prior to the invasion. For example, Ukraine
had already been making significant investments in
strengthening its cyber defences since Russia’s 2014
annexation of Crimea.2 Ukraine’s experience defending
against Russian cyber operations in the past decade has
therefore formed a critical component of the country’s
national cyber resilience.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 7
3. Implementing Basic Cyber Security
A key insight for all ten countries surveyed is the need
to improve basic cyber security across the individual
and organisational levels, as well as across the pub -
lic and private sectors. In April 2023, the Five Eyes’
national cyber-security organisations jointly published
a report on best practices for smart cities identifying
risks and providing recommendations.3 IBM, Microsoft
and Nozomi Networks also contributed to this report.
The study highlights a changing approach to ensur -
ing cyber hygiene by re-examining and strengthening
foundational defences against repeated and targeted
cyber attacks during crises. In particular, countries are
placing greater emphasis on improving their national
cyber resilience, including through the use of regula -
tory frameworks. Other measures include implement -
ing security by design across all stages of capability
development and organisational functions.
Canada has announced plans to boost cyber secu -
rity. While the country had already identified this area
as a significant priority and released its National Cyber
Security Strategy in 2018, in its 2022 budget the govern-
ment earmarked CAD875.2 million for five years starting
in the financial year 2022–23. 4 Out of this, CAD252.3m
will be invested in making critical government sys -
tems more resilient to cyber incidents. The budget also
provided for another CAD238.2m (not included in the
CAD875.2m mentioned earlier) for additional unspeci -
fied measures in response to the evolving threat land -
scape. Canada announced its intention to establish a
cyber-security certification programme to protect its
defence supply chain committing CAD25m over three
years in an initiative designed with the US Department
of Defense.5
In its National Strategic Review released in 2022,
France laid out cyber resilience as a key strategic pri -
ority.6 In addition, President Emmanuel Macron
announced the government’s intent to have world-class
cyber defence within five years. 7 In November 2023,
the government announced a modest commitment
of EUR39m for 17 projects intended to bolster cyber
resilience. The National Strategic Review noted that
despite efforts to boost cyber security, there was still
‘significant room for improvement’.8
Similarly, while Germany had established a cyber-
security centre in 2016, the country recognises that it
needs to continue its efforts in this area. In the report
titled ‘The State of IT Security in Germany 2023’, the
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI) stated that
it needed to ‘actively shape cyber security to get “in
front of the curve”’.9 The BSI also noted that since 2020,
corporate spending on IT had been increasing steadily,
and the figure for this area was EUR7.8 billion in 2022.
Despite these investments, German companies suffered
a loss of EUR203bn from cyber attacks in 2022, accord -
ing to the digital association Bitkom. As part of an over-
arching vision and restructuring of the Federal Ministry
of the Interior and Community (BMI), the ministry
released in July 2022 the ‘Cyber Security Agenda of the
Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community’. In that
paper, the ministry explicitly stated that the Ukraine
war had showed the importance of cyber security for
advanced digital economies like Germany that face
increased threats through targeted attacks on critical
infrastructure and increased cyber-criminal activity.10
Japan’s 2022 National Security Strategy (NSS) noted
the importance of cyber security and resilience, espe -
cially in terms of defending critical civilian infrastruc -
ture, preventing disinformation and possessing the
capabilities to counter information warfare in general.11
In 2022, Japan also released its updated Cybersecurity
Policy for Critical Infrastructure Protection. 12 This doc-
ument emphasised the need for independent and pro -
active measures by all stakeholders to make sure they
contribute to nurturing a cyber-security-focused culture
for the sustainable development of society. 13 While the
NSS mentioned Russia’s actions as a key trigger for
Tokyo’s changing security outlook, this shift is moti -
vated more by China.
This is particularly relevant given that Japan’s
National Center of Incident Readiness and Strategy for

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Cybersecurity admitted that it suffered from a security
breach which went undetected from October 2022 to
June 2023. While the Japanese have not identified China
outright as responsible for the October 2022 breach, sev-
eral sources have made the link, and as a result Japan
has committed to boosting its cyber-security budget by a
factor of ten over the next five years.14 This breach came
after reports that Japan had 114 ransomware attacks in
the first half of 2022, which was an 87% increase over
the previous year.15
After submitting bids to join NATO, Finland and
Sweden revealed their concerns over a rise in cyber
attacks and possible Russian retaliation. Finland
reported seeing a four-fold spike in ransomware attacks
since joining the Alliance.16 The Nordic countries are also
prioritising cyber security as part of improving national
cyber defence. Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and
Sweden are set to invest a total of USD2bn in upgrading
their military and national cyber defences.17
In addition, there has been an increase in public–
private partnerships, with cyber-security companies
forming strategic partnerships with regional armed
forces. For example, the Norwegian firm Atea clinched
a two-year IT and cyber-security services contract
worth USD45m from the Norwegian Defence Research
Establishment and the Norwegian National Security
Authority.18 This followed a USD6m contract signed
by Finnish software specialist Digia and Danish cyber-
security technologies provider Arbit Cyber Defence
Systems to build a protected information-exchange
gateway for the Finnish Defence Forces. During its half-
year EU presidency, Sweden also identified cyber secu-
rity as a key strategic area.19
The UK and the US had considered cyber security
a priority before February 2022, so attributing their
investments in this area solely to the war would be a
misinterpretation. However, the war has definitely bol-
stered efforts by both countries to adopt a more diversi-
fied and holistic approach to the cyber domain.
In its annual cyber-strategy progress report, London
announced plans to strengthen its cyber resilience leg -
islation and highlighted how it had supported indus -
try and critical national infrastructure operators facing
heightened cyber threats in response to the Russian inva-
sion.20 It found that 12,000 small businesses had used the
National Cyber Security Centre’s Cyber Action Plan and
over 15,000 had used the ‘Check Your Cyber Security’
tool. The UK established a National Cyber Advisory
Board in 2022, and it also launched in 2023 a Cyber
Advisor scheme that aims to provide small and medium
enterprises with reliable and cost-effective cyber-secu -
rity advice and practical support through the applica -
tion of the technical controls listed in its Cyber Essentials
scheme.21 The National Cyber Strategy 2022 highlighted
the UK’s commitment to adopting a whole-of-society
approach and reinforcing basic cyber hygiene to ensure
well-rounded cyber security.22 While the strategy identi-
fied the improvements that had taken place with 77%
of businesses responding positively to the government’s
efforts and identifying cyber security as a key priority,
the strategy nevertheless noted that legacy IT systems,
supply-chain vulnerabilities and a shortage of cyber-
security professionals remained areas of concern.23
In the same vein, Washington’s National Cybersecurity
Strategy 2023 emphasised the need to rebalance cyber-
security responsibilities away from vulnerable sections
like small businesses and individuals to organisations
capable of risk reduction.24 Prior to the Russia–Ukraine
war, the US government had already put out executive
orders and memorandums on improving national cyber
security, leveraging quantum computing and risk mitiga-
tion for vulnerable cryptographic systems, and moving
the government towards zero-trust cyber-security princi-
ples.25 The 2023 strategy sought to build on those efforts
by securing critical infrastructure through expanding the
use of minimum cyber-security requirements in critical
sectors, enabling public–private collaboration, as well as
defending and modernising federal networks.26

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 9
4. Cyber Defence in Depth
The US has been a visible proponent of a forward-lean-
ing cyber-defence strategy known as ‘persistent engage-
ment’ that recognises the need for more than passive
cyber defence and sees the value in a greater continu -
ity of cyber defence across the spectrum of conflict. In
2018, the US government formally adopted a policy of
‘defending forward’ in cyberspace that describes the
use of cyber operations to disrupt and degrade adver -
sarial ecosystems.27 This policy had multiple objectives,
including to disrupt or defeat adversary attacks in peace-
time without crossing the threshold to armed conflict
and, in parallel, to enable US cyber forces to be better
prepared to make the transition from peacetime compe-
tition to crisis management and beyond to warfighting.
The expectation was that this activity would yield valu-
able new intelligence on adversary systems and techni-
cal procedures that the US could exploit more readily
than if it had waited for an all-out war to arise.
The US has regarded the outcome of its cyber opera-
tions in the war as validation for its strategy of ‘persistent
engagement’ and ‘defending forward’. 28 Washington
has referenced its collaboration with Ukraine to jointly
detect, disable or disrupt a large proportion of Russian
cyber operations that had escalated dramatically
against Ukrainian military and civil targets in January
2022 as a prelude to the war. While countries recognise
that a broader approach to cyber defence that seeks to
incorporate whole-of-society security and securitisa -
tion against hybrid threats is inescapable, how far the
full tenets of US persistence theory and the approach to
defend forward is adopted varies between the countries
surveyed. The US and its closest allies (such as the UK)
are prioritising efforts with a wider range of interna -
tional partners to add to collective cyber-security capac-
ity, including by taking up a commitment at some level
to concepts such as ‘defend forward’ or ‘hunt forward’.
Countries like France and the Netherlands had
acknowledged before the war that they possess offensive
cyber capabilities and these could help with a ‘defend
forward’ posture. Similarly, Canada has reiterated its
intention to continue to develop and scale its offensive
cyber capabilities. 29 Prior to the war, Sweden had set
up two units to increase robustness for defensive and
offensive cyber operations.30
Japan has given its introduction of a more proactive
approach to cyber defence the label ‘active cyber defence’
– a term used by many countries but with vastly vary -
ing meanings. Japan’s 2022 National Security Strategy
incorporated this concept with the aim of eliminating ‘in
advance the possibility of serious cyberattacks that may
cause national security concerns’ and preventing the
‘spread of damage in case of such attacks’.31 Of special note,
the strategy said that this should be used even if the cyber
attacks ‘do not amount to an armed attack’. The Japanese
government also announced it would have to introduce
significant legal reforms, including some reinterpretation
of a constitutional provision that prohibits government
intrusion on the secrecy of private communications.32
However, there are concerns regarding this tilt
towards more proactive approaches to cyber defence.
France, Germany and the Netherlands have publicly
stated some concerns about a more forward-leaning
defence. In December 2022, the commander of France’s
Cyber Command expressed reservations about the
essentially aggressive character of US hunt-forward
operations in spite of their utility.33 Similarly, the Dutch
Defence White Paper 2022 mentioned the role of the
Defence Cyber Command in defeating disruptive
cyber attacks,34 but the government policy is limited to
allowing such operations in wartime. The 2023 German
National Security Strategy carried a similar message:
‘We fundamentally reject the idea of using hack-backs
as a means of cyber defence.’35 The Dutch and Germans,
however, are likely to keep their options open as both
support more proactive approaches to cyber defence,
including working with allies. Several European coun-
tries are looking for a consensus on the scope of active
defence and this will likely be a precondition for estab-
lishing new approaches to proactive engagement with
hostile cyber campaigns on a continuing basis.36

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
5. Defence Strategy and Plans
Several countries have begun undertaking restructuring
efforts aimed at better integrating their cyber abilities
with national-security aims and military capabilities.
The rationale of this effort is to ensure that the politi -
cal, military, intelligence and technical aspects of cyber
defence are mutually reinforcing.
The US, UK and Japan see such integration as a
necessity and an urgent priority. US Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Cyber Policy Mieke Eoyang
noted that the Ukraine conflict has most clearly demon-
strated the importance of ‘integrated cyber capabilities
alongside other war fighting capabilities’. 37 Tellingly
in September 2023, the US Department of Defense pri -
oritised this integration. 38 In the UK’s National Cyber
Strategy 2022, London reaffirmed its commitment to
developing multidomain operations as laid out in pre-
war policy. 39 However, the strategy did not mention
Ukraine nor the war specifically. Japan has also given
new emphasis to ensuring integrated capabilities in
space, cyberspace and electromagnetic domains.40
Other countries that have undertaken organisational
restructuring include Poland, France and Germany.
Poland has been investing in cyberspace defence and cyber
security since before the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but
the war has made these efforts more urgent and critical. In
February 2022, Poland established the Cyberspace Defense
Forces modelled on US Cyber Command, and this entity
is expected to be operational by 2024.41 The French Army
is setting up a Combat Futures Command to keep pace
with the changing nature of warfare and to work towards
the integration of the cyber and underwater domains with
conventional ones.42 The Dutch Defence Cyber Command
also aims to increase its strike capabilities through deeper
integration of its cyber mission teams into multidomain
military operations.43
Increased defence spending on cyber capabilities,
often by large margins, has been a feature of responses to
the war. In 2022, Finland along with Austria, France, the
Netherlands, Romania and Spain, urged the European
Commission to increase cyber-defence spending.44 These
countries called for the EU’s Cyber Defence Policy to
include not just cyber solidarity in terms of military com-
munication networks, but also a clear blueprint for holis-
tic cyber defence that includes a comprehensive defence
technology and industrial base, increased civilian part -
nership, and voluntary cyber-capacity joint operational
development.45 The countries also called for increased
investment in better coordinated cyber defence and a
more holistic approach to European cyberspace. The
Finnish government has reiterated its goal of accelerating
artificial-intelligence security innovation to strengthen
national defence. The 2024 national budget aims to
increase Finnish cyber defence spending by 30% from its
2023 investment of EUR280m.46
The Netherlands’ Defence White Paper 2022 fore -
shadowed an expansion of military cyber personnel
from approximately 150 cyber reservists in the Defence
Cyber Command by recruiting more than 400 full-time
equivalent cyber specialists.47 In 2023, France announced
a 300% increase in funding for military cyber training
by 2030.48 There will also be an increase to 5,000 cyber
combatants in the same timeframe.49
Sweden’s defence budget for 2024 is set to grow by
28% after a substantial increase in 2023 to enable the
country to operate effectively with NATO across all
domains, including cyber.50 Under the 2023 budget, the
government committed to expanding the capabilities of
its Cyber Defence Unit to reinforce its ability to defend
against hybrid threats.51
As for Japan, its government plans to increase the per-
sonnel associated with cyber-related units like the Self-
Defense Forces’ Cyber Command to 4000 by 2027. 52 By
doing so, Tokyo aims to increase the size of the cyber
workforce associated with the Ministry of Defense to
20,000.53 However, while the timing of these measures
(announced in December 2022) suggests that these efforts
might be related to the war in Ukraine, Japan considers
other geopolitical actors such as China to be a greater
threat.54 Beijing, rather than the war, was likely a greater
contributing factor to Tokyo’s new cyber measures.55

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 11
6. Alliances and Partnerships
The successful cyber defence of Ukraine during the war
has been heavily dependent on cyber-security measures
Kyiv took during the preceding decade of cyber compe-
tition and conflict with Russia. These included Ukraine
bolstering its cyber security through close collaboration
with international partners and with the private sector,
with a substantial acceleration in such cooperation in
the immediate run-up to the Russian invasion and ever
since. That acceleration meant many of the most cru -
cial partnerships were often enacted ad hoc and cannot
be transferrable elsewhere. A key lesson from the war
for other states, therefore, is to build a more structured
approach to international partnerships and work with
the relevant parts of the private sector during peacetime
competition so that they do not have to restructure,
reskill and rebuild in the middle of a war.
All the countries reviewed in this report are fully
aware of the positive impacts of international collabora-
tion on national cyber defence. These countries also real-
ised the need to implement sustainable and structured
collaboration going forward. While there have been
numerous admirable examples of allies and technology
companies rallying to support Ukraine’s cyber defence,
other countries cannot rely on this demonstration of
sympathy and commitment as a given in the future. A
key aspect of this reform, therefore, is anchored around
deeper cyber collaboration between countries, particu -
larly for cyber defence and information sharing.
The actions of pro-Russian state and non-state actors
have reinforced this need for cyber collaboration. Pro-
Kremlin hacktivists have shut down key websites and
services in France, Germany and Switzerland. 56 They
have also ramped up cyber aggression throughout
the course of the war, going after various key entities
such as the military, transport services and energy
networks.57 This has reinforced the criticality of cyber
defence and, particularly, collaborative defence for
European countries and their allies, whose cyber-secu -
rity architecture has been stress-tested through repeti -
tive and escalatory attacks.
Several countries have found that collaborative cyber
defence can be strengthened through cyber exercises
which often serve as a trust- and capacity-building
measure encouraging deeper international cooperation
across a range of activities. Exercises like Locked Shields
and red teaming, as well as bilateral and trilateral
engagements, all serve to foster camaraderie to a certain
extent. However, such multifaceted and multinational
activities require countries to commit to providing tech-
nical experts and participants in a domain which is usu-
ally significantly understaffed.
There have been a number of cyber drills held during
the course of the Ukraine war that show the collabora -
tive nature of such exercises. For instance, in February
2023, France hosted ORION 23, which was the largest
military exercise involving French forces in 30 years.
It was a multidomain one at that with 14 allied coun -
tries participating.58 Around the same time, the British
Army led Defence Cyber Marvel 2, the largest military-
led cyber exercise in western Europe. 59 The drill was a
capstone exercise for a training effort over more than 12
months, and it included more than 750 cyber special -
ists from various British armed services, government
agencies and industry partners. Other countries such as
Italy, Japan, Kenya and Oman also took part in Defence
Cyber Marvel 2. The exercise was more oriented towards
individual skills than combined operations by military
networks. Japan also believes that collaboration is key
to cyber defence, and Tokyo intends to deepen cyber
ties with the US in terms of Flexible Deterrent Options,
bilateral exercises, joint intelligence, as well as intelli -
gence, surveillance and reconnaissance.60
Some of these relationships have extended to joint cyber
training, combined planning or coordinated cyber opera-
tions. As of mid-2023, the US had conducted more than 50
‘hunt-forward’ operations on 75 networks partnering with
at least 23 countries.61 In February 2023, Finland, Sweden
and the US conducted a trilateral military exercise to bol-
ster cyber defence and ensure cross-domain interoperabil-
ity.62 The exercise was aimed at improving information

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
sharing and best practices regarding the active defence
of networks.
The war in Ukraine has demonstrated that alliances
and partnerships, particularly for cyber defence, are
integral to well-rounded national security and defence.
In order to deepen and accelerate partnership chan -
nels during crises, it is important for countries to start
by ensuring structured collaboration and trust-building
during peacetime. While new partnerships between
countries could be forged more easily due to the shared
sense of vulnerability during wartime, that may not
always be the case. Hence, countries would do well to
build deeper partnerships with trusted channels of com-
munication in the present to avoid having to resort to
reactive ad hoc measures, which would be implemented
myopically in the case of a future conflict. The war has
demonstrated that it is possible to find novel methods
to share critical information and resources without com-
promising sensitive intelligence methods and sources.
Technology Companies as Critical Partners
While there is an appreciation for the expansion and
deepening of alliances between states, the war has also
underlined the role of tech companies as geopolitical
actors. The private sector has made decisive contribu -
tions to the war in two key areas. Firstly, the direct pro-
vision of cyber-security capabilities, analytic support,
connectivity and data resilience has buttressed Ukraine’s
position. Secondly, curtailing operations within Russia
following the invasion has directly affected Moscow’s
ICT sector.
In the run-up to Russia’s full-scale invasion, Amazon
was working with Kyiv to back up government data -
bases to the cloud, and this helped mitigate the damage
that would have occurred had the Ukrainian systems
been physically destroyed, breached or degraded. 63
Although Amazon, Google, Microsoft and Starlink have
provided crucial and timely support to Ukraine during
the crisis, their intervention has significantly compli -
cated traditional understandings of what is defined as
a combatant under the Law of Armed Conflict (LOAC).
The Ukraine war has also seen a resurgence of hack -
tivist activity that blurs the line between state-spon -
sored and voluntary activities. In such circumstances,
the application of international law is rendered much
more difficult.64 Lindy Cameron, chief executive of the
UK’s National Cyber Security Centre, observed that
the Russian campaign ‘largely failed’ because of the
application of ‘Ukrainian and Western digital expertise
within governments and the private sector’.65 However,
countries remain uncertain about these interventions
and the knock-on effects they might cause when seen
through the framework of the LOAC going forward.
Nonetheless, the review of countries’ positions has
found that most governments have a new appreciation
for the role of technology companies in wartime given the
key role the latter have played in cyber defence, resilience
and intelligence sharing. The most notable interventions
have included participation in cyber operations to defend
Ukrainian systems; provision of information and commu-
nications technology (ICT) infrastructure like cloud stor-
age or satellites to keep Ukraine connected; and boycotts
on the provision of ICT services to Russia. In this confla-
tion of private actor and combatant, however, the safety of
industry cannot be guaranteed. In the future, aggressors
might look to target companies providing crucial defence
support, thereby posing a risk to these firms’ employees
internationally. This further blurs the already hazy demar-
cation between peacetime and conflict.
According to one study, as of 10 November 2023,
over 1,000 companies had curtailed operations in Russia,
and this had contributed to the economic decoupling of
Western and other ICT corporations from Russia. 66 In
March 2022, Jeremy Fleming, then-director of the UK’s
Government Communications Headquarters, said: ‘We’ve
seen businesses all over the Western world distance them-
selves from the Russian economy. We’ve seen technology
providers step up to make sure that Ukraine can stay con-
nected, or to address disinformation.’ Governments have
had to begin ‘working with businesses in new and truly
collaborative ways’.67 While many Western technology
companies have rallied around Ukraine in an admirable
manner, they might be less inclined to do so in the future
if there is a greater clash of material interests or the bound-
ary between aggressor and victim is not as clearly defined.
A number of governments and many of these technology
companies have lauded the benefits of these contributions,
but are also wary of the political, financial, legal and oper-
ational challenges to sustainability in the long run and to
replicability in the future.68

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 13
7. Information Operations
Competition in the information space has involved
attempts by the Russian and Ukrainian governments
and their non-state supporters to control the narrative
surrounding the war and its progress. 69 This includes
the spread of disinformation, misinformation, rumours
and propaganda. While information warfare is not
novel, cyber capabilities enable it to be carried out on
a greater scale and scope than what was previously
possible.70 States’ use of artificial intelligence, bots and
social media to control the narrative has made the pro -
liferation of misinformation, propaganda, rumours
and disinformation rampant. The information space
has emerged as a key area for competition as well as a
significant vulnerability for many of the countries sur -
veyed. This section will examine how countries have
introduced various measures to build societal resilience
against cyber-enabled information operations.
Many of the countries included in this study had
identified the psychological- or political-warfare
dimension of disinformation and information opera -
tions by Russia before the invasion. Finland, Poland and
Sweden had spoken about the increase of Russian infor-
mation operations and the threat these actions pose to
their national security and regional stability. 71 These
countries had characterised information operations
as sufficiently important in their own right to warrant
significant new expenditure and institutional attention.
What follows are some examples of national efforts to
enhance societal cognitive resilience, which include
having dedicated government resources; increasing
digital literacy; fact-checking; myth-debunking initia -
tives; and cyber operations to disrupt adversary’s infor-
mation operations.
In January 2022, Sweden established under its
defence ministry the Psychological Defence Agency,
which emphasises military defence and civilian resil -
ience.72 The agency is funded at SEK8m per year from
2024 to 2026, and will have 45 personnel. 73 Similarly,
noting the ‘prominence of the information front’, the
UK set up the Government Information Cell in early
January 2022 to counter Russian propaganda and dis -
information.74 The British government also released a
countering disinformation toolkit called RESIST, which
stands for Recognise mis- and disinformation, Early
warning, Situational insight, Impact analysis, Strategic
communication and Tracking effectiveness to enable
governments to more easily communicate threats to
their audiences through outcomes and case studies.75
Finland has committed to bolstering its communica -
tion networks to ensure its citizens have access to nec -
essary authoritative information in the event of serious
incidents and emergency conditions. 76 In addition, the
Finnish government has a clear communications strat -
egy through which authorities pledge to provide infor -
mation with objectives and impacts clearly described.
Finland ranked first out of 41 European countries in a
2022 survey measuring resilience against misinforma -
tion, and this accolade was partially attributed to the
national education system teaching Finnish students to
identify fake news at a young age.77
Since the 2016 US presidential elections, Washington
has been aware of the potential for Russian interfer -
ence in its information environment and democratic
processes. While at home the US has relied on tech
companies to de-platform Russian propaganda, its
approach to countering disinformation has been to
increase global information sharing with various US
government agencies playing a key role in the process.78
For example, the US Department of State released in
November 2023 a media note regarding Russia’s dis -
information campaign in Latin America that relied on
media contacts to garner support and foster anti-US
and anti-NATO sentiments.79 Similarly, the Department
of State’s Global Engagement Center has also issued a
press release on disarming disinformation.80 In the same
vein, the US Cyber Command and the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency have released
guides on how to identify adversarial propaganda. 81
The Cyber Command has also led cyber operations to
identify Russian troll farms and block them as part of

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
election defence, an activity underway since at least the
2018 mid-term elections. In 2022, following the inva -
sion of Ukraine, Cyber Command chief General Paul
Nakasone confirmed that the US had undertaken cyber
operations to dismantle Russian disinformation infra -
structure, including in Ukraine.82
The value of alliances in defending against infor -
mation operations prompted the establishment of the
NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence
(StratCom COE) in 2014 with seven member states:
Estonia, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and
the UK. 83 Even non-NATO member Australia joined
the COE in 2022.84 The G7 also set up a Rapid Response
Mechanism for information sharing and best practices
to counter influence operations.85 In December 2022, the
European External Action Service (EEAS) launched a new
platform called the Information Sharing and Analysis
Centre as part of its efforts to counter disinformation
campaigns by Russia and China. 86 Two months later,
the service released the first EEAS Report on Foreign
Information Manipulation and Interference Threats.87
The EU and Canada have attributed and imposed
sanctions on the individuals and entities behind
Russian information operations. In 2023, the European
Council called out Moscow for its information manip -
ulation, and listed seven individuals and five entities
responsible for conducting digital information manip -
ulation campaigns under the alias of Recent Reliable
News.88 Canada has been very proactive in its diplo -
macy against disinformation, imposing sanctions on
people seen as complicit in spreading Russian disin -
formation.89 Like the attribution for cyber operations,
attribution when it comes to information operations
while imperfect does at least set a threshold for what
qualifies as responsible versus irresponsible behaviour
in cyberspace.
Information operations by Russia and other actors are
a clear threat to the countries surveyed in this research.
To be sure, many efforts to counter these operations pre-
ceded Russia’s invasion or are related to the prospect
of electoral interference in 2024. 90 However, the war in
Ukraine has definitely served as an inflection point
underlining the criticality of countering disinformation
for most countries. To build societal cognitive resilience,
governments are not only creating new internal units to
lead on this work, but also adopting a whole-of-society
approach through partnering with platforms to introduce
greater transparency and accountability mechanisms to
information systems. Authorities are also driving edu -
cational initiatives to promote digital literacy, as well as
attributing information operations and working through
alliances to counter information operations.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 15
8. Implications
The US and its key allies, including Japan, are mobilis -
ing robustly for new capabilities in cyberspace. Some of
the targets for growth are ambitious and may well prove
to be unreachable for individual countries. Budgets and
the availability of skilled workers will likely not match
the new goals in most countries. It is highly likely there-
fore that countries in the US-led alliances and other
groupings, such as the EU, will seek to strengthen
alliance structures for even more collaborative cyber
defence to compensate for their own shortcomings.
The profile of national cyber security will continue to
become even more prominent in national-security pol -
icy than it is today. It is likely that in the countries most
affected by Russia’s cyber operations, there will be even
greater interest in the ways in which the armed forces
can be organised to support national cyber defence.
As long as Russia continues its illegal war or
its illegal occupation of Ukraine, the prospects for
escalation of cyber operations, including for influence-
seeking or psychological effects, will remain. Even if
Russia ended the war and was forced to withdraw
from Ukraine, the high-intensity cyber and infor -
mation war between Russia and the West would
likely continue.
Apart from Ukraine and Russia which are at war, the
protagonists will try to keep the level of cyber activi -
ties below the threshold of armed conflict. There may
be incentives for Russia to test the limits of that cyber
threshold for the US or its allies as a preferred substi -
tute for more serious escalation in diplomatic or mili -
tary actions. As long as Russia continues to suffer major
setbacks in the war, the cyber confrontation will remain
unstable and have the potential to become more dan -
gerous. If that happens, we can expect to see an addi -
tional round of responses in national cyber policy by the
states surveyed in this report.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
Notes
1 Government of Canada, ‘Remarks From Minister Anand
at CANSEC 2023’, 5 June 2023, https://www.canada.ca/en/
department-national-defence/news/2023/06/remarks-from-
minister-anand-at-cansec-2023.html. Similar announcements
underlining the importance of cyber security in the
face of contemporary threats were announced by other
countries. For the US, see US Department of Defense, ‘2023
Cyber Strategy’, 2023, https://media.defense.gov/2023/
Sep/12/2003299076/-1/-1/1/2023_DOD_Cyber_Strategy_
Summary.PDF. For the Netherlands, see Netherlands
Government, ‘Security Strategy for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands’, 2023, https://www.government.nl/binaries/
government/documenten/publications/2023/04/03/security-
strategy-for-the-kingdom-of-the-netherlands/Security+Strate
gy+for+the+Kingdom+of+the+Netherlands.pdf.
2 Isabel Schmidt, Avery Parsons Grayson and Mayesha
Alam, ‘Cross-Cutting Responses to Strengthen Ukraine’s
Digital Resilience’, Digital Frontlines, 28 June 2023, https://
digitalfrontlines.io/2023/06/28/cross-cutting-responses-to-
strengthen-ukraines-digital-resilience/.
3 United States Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency, United States National Security Agency, United
States Federal Bureau of Investigation, United Kingdom
National Cyber Security Centre, Australian Cyber Security
Centre, Canadian Centre for Cyber Security and New
Zealand National Cyber Security Centre, ‘Cybersecurity Best
Practices for Smart Cities’, 19 April 2023, https://www.cisa.
gov/sites/default/files/2023-04/cybersecurity-best-practices-
for-smart-cities_508.pdf.
4 Department of Finance Canada, ‘2022 Budget’,
2022, p. 136, https://nationalpost.com/news/politics/
canada-federal-budget-2022-full-text.
5 Government of Canada, ‘Government of Canada Helping
Defence Industry Protect Itself From Cyber Security
Threats’, 31 May 2023, https://www.canada.ca/en/
public-services-procurement/news/2023/05/government-
of-canada-helping-defence-industry-protect-itself-from-
cyber-security-threats.html.
6 Republic of France, ‘National Strategic Review 2022’,
2022, pp. 39–40, https://www.sgdsn.gouv.fr/files/files/
rns-uk-20221202.pdf.
7 Elise Vincent, ‘Macron Wants “World-class Cyber Defense”
for France Within Five Years’, Le Monde, 11 November 2022,
https://www.lemonde.fr/en/international/article/2022/11/11/
emmanuel-macron-wants-world-class-cyber-defense-for-
france-within-five-years_6003801_4.html.
8 Republic of France, ‘National Strategic Review 2022’, p. 39.
9 Federal Office for Information Security, ‘The State of IT
Security in Germany 2023’, November 2023, p. 5, https://
www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/
Publications/Securitysituation/IT-Security-Situation-in-
Germany-2023.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=7.
10 Ibid., p. 5.
11 Ministry of Defense, ‘National Security Strategy’,
December 2022, pp. 18, 23, https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/
siryou/221216anzenhoshou/nss-e.pdf.
12 Government of Japan, ‘The Cybersecurity Policy for Critical
Infrastructure Protection’, June 2022, https://www.nisc.go.jp/
eng/pdf/cip_policy_2022_eng.pdf.
13 Ibid., p. 2.
14 Graham Cluley, ‘Japan’s Cybersecurity Agency Admits
It Was Hacked for Months’, Bitdefender, 30 August 2023,
https://www.bitdefender.com/blog/hotforsecurity/
japans-cybersecurity-agency-admits-it-was-hacked-
for-months/.
15 Japan Times, ‘Japan Saw 87% Increase in Ransomware
Attacks in First Half of 2022’, 15 September 2022, https://
www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2022/09/15/national/
crime-legal/ransomeware-attacks-rise/.
16 Alexander Martin, ‘Finland Sees Fourfold
Spike in Ransomware Attacks Since Joining
NATO, Senior Cyber Official Says’, The Record,
3 August 2023, https://therecord.media/
finland-sees-fourfold-spike-in-rasomware-attacks-nato.
17 Gerard O’Dwyer, ‘Nordic Firms Ride Wave of Cyber M&A
Activity’, Defense News, 4 July 2023,
https://www.defensenews.com/industry/2023/07/04/
nordic-firms-ride-wave-of-cyber-ma-activity/.
18 Ibid.
19 Gerard O’Dwyer, ‘Sweden Vows to Push Defense
Collaboration, Cyber Defense at EU Helm’, Defense
News, 6 January 2023, https://www.defensenews.com/
global/europe/2023/01/06/sweden-vows-to-push-defense-
collaboration-cyber-defense-at-eu-helm/.
20 Cabinet Office, ‘National Cyber Strategy 2022 Annual
Progress Report 2022-2023’, 14 August 2023,

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 17
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-cyber-
strategy-2022-annual-progress-report-2022-2023/national-
cyber-strategy-2022-annual-progress-report-2022-2023-html.
21 National Cyber Security Centre, ‘Cyber Advisor’, https://
www.ncsc.gov.uk/schemes/cyber-advisor; and National
Cyber Security Centre, ‘ About Cyber Essentials’, https://
www.ncsc.gov.uk/cyberessentials/overview.
22 Her Majesty’s Government, ‘National Cyber Strategy 2022:
Pioneering a Cyber Future With the Whole of the UK’,
2022, pp. 14, 35, 67, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/1053023/national-cyber-strategy-amend.pdf.
23 Ibid., p. 23.
24 The White House, ‘National Cybersecurity Strategy’,
March 2023, p. 4, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2023/03/National-Cybersecurity-Strategy-2023.pdf.
25 The White House, ‘Executive Order on Improving the Nation’s
Cybersecurity’, 12 May 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-
on-improving-the-nations-cybersecurity/; and Executive Office
of the President, ‘Memorandum for the Heads of Executive
Departments and Agencies’, 26 January 2022, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/M-22-09.pdf.
26 The White House, ‘National Cybersecurity Strategy’, pp. 6,
7, 9, 10, 15.
27 US Cyber Command, ‘2023 Posture Statement of Paul M.
Nakasone’, 7 March 2023, https://www.cybercom.mil/Media/
News/Article/3320195/2023-posture-statement-of-general-
paul-m-nakasone/.
28 US Department of Defense, ‘Cyber Strategy’, pp. 2, 9.
29 Government of Canada, ‘Standing Senate Committee on
National Security, Defence and Veterans Affairs (SECD) -
Arctic Security’, 24 April 2023, https://www.canada.ca/en/
department-national-defence/corporate/reports-publications/
proactive-disclosure/secd-april-24-2023/cybercapabilities.html.
30 Swedish Armed Forces, ‘Nytt it-försvarsförband stärker Sveriges
cyberförsvarsförmåga’ [New IT Defence Unit Strengthens
Sweden’s Cyber-defence Capabilities], 12 January 2022,
https://www.forsvarsmakten.se/sv/aktuellt/2022/01/nytt-it-
forsvarsforband-starker-sveriges-cyberforsvarsformaga/.
31 Ministry of Defense, ‘National Security Strategy’, p. 23.
32 Yomiuri Shimbun, ‘ Active Cyber Defence Framework Could
One Day Protect Japan’, 14 September 2022, https://asianews.
network/active-cyber-defence-framework-could-one-day-
protect-japan/.
33 National Assembly, ‘Compte rendu Commission de la défense
nationale et des forces armées’ [Transcript of the Committee on
National Defence and the Armed Forces], 7 December 2022,
p. 8, https://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/dyn/16/comptes-
rendus/cion_def/l16cion_def2223027_compte-rendu.pdf.
34 Ministry of Defence, ‘ A Stronger Netherlands, a Safer Europe
Investing in a Robust NATO and EU 2022 Defence White
Paper’, 2022, p. 52, https://english.defensie.nl/binaries/
defence/documenten/publications/2022/07/19/defence-white-
paper-2022/Defence+White+Paper+2022.pdf.
35 Federal Government, ‘Robust. Resilient. Sustainable.
Integrated Security for Germany. National Security Strategy,
2023’, p. 62, https://www.nationalesicherheitsstrategie.de/
National-Security-Strategy-EN.pdf.
36 See Annegret Bendiek and Jakob Bund, ‘Shifting Paradigms
in Europe’s Approach to Cyber Defence’, 25 September 2023,
p. 3, https://www.swp-berlin.org/publications/products/
comments/2023C48_Europe_CyberDefence.pdf.
37 Jeff Seldin, ‘Offense is the New Defense in Pentagon’s
Revamped Cyber Strategy’, Voice of America, 12 September
2023, https://www.voanews.com/a/offense-is-the-new-defense-
in-pentagon-s-revamped-cyber-strategy/7266028.html.
38 US Department of Defense, ‘2023 Cyber Strategy’, p. 3.
39 Ministry of Defence, ‘Integrated Operating Concept
2025’, 2020, p. 10, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/1014659/Integrated_Operating_Concept_2025.
pdf. Integrated Operating Concept 2025 set out the
need for a ‘transformation of the military instrument,
including the need to structure forces to operate that
can be adapted at graduated readiness to warfight’. The
changes were premised on the need for multidomain
operations with emphasis on the ‘importance of
integration with allies, of the levers of statecraft, and
across the five operational domains’.
40 Ministry of Defense, ‘National Security Strategy’, pp. 18, 27.
41 Wiktor Sędkowski, ‘US Cyber Forces as a Model for the
Polish Ones’, Warsaw Institute, 28 March 2022, https://
warsawinstitute.org/us-cyber-forces-model-polish-ones/.
42 Bertrand Toujouse, ‘French Land Forces Chief: How France’s
Army is Transforming for the Modern Era’, 25 May 2023,
Breaking Defense, https://breakingdefense.com/2023/05/
french-army-chief-how-frances-army-is-transforming-for-
the-modern-era/. Toujouse was France’s army chief when
this article was published.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
43 Ministry of Defence, ‘2022 Defence White Paper’, July
2022, p. 52, https://english.defensie.nl/binaries/defence/
documenten/publications/2022/07/19/defence-white-
paper-2022/Defence+White+Paper+2022.pdf.
44 Luca Bertuzzi, ‘Six EU Countries Call for Ambitious Cyber
Defence Policy, Document’, Euractiv, 30 September 2022,
https://www.euractiv.com/section/cybersecurity/news/
six-eu-countries-call-for-ambitious-cyber-defence-policy-
document/.
45 Ibid.
46 Gerard O’Dwyer, ‘Finnish Government to Bolster Spending
on Cyber-AI Defences’, Computer Weekly, 7 September
2023, https://www.computerweekly.com/news/366551252/
Finish-government-to-bolster-spending-on-cyber-AI-
defences.
47 Ministry of Defence, ‘ A Stronger Netherlands, a Safer Europe
Investing in a Robust NATO and EU 2022 Defence White
Paper’, p. 52.
48 Jean-Marc Manach, ‘Les priorités du Comcyber : chiffre, lutte
informatique d’influence (L2I) et partage de données’ [ComCyber
Priorities: Cryptology, the Struggle for Cyber Influence and
Information Sharing], Next Impact, 4 May 2023, https://
www.nextinpact.com/article/71604/les-priorites-comcyber-
chiffre-lutte-informatique-dinfluence-l2i-et-partage-donnees.
49 Ibid.
50 Lee Ferran, ‘Sweden Aims to Boost Military Spending by
Nearly 30%, Hitting NATO Spending Target’, Breaking
Defense, 12 September 2023, https://breakingdefense.
com/2023/09/sweden-aims-to-boost-military-spending-by-
nearly-30-hitting-nato-spending-target/.
51 Gerard O’Dwyer, ‘Sweden Boosts Cyber, Defense
Spending with NATO in Mind’, C4ISRNet, 23 November
2022, https://www.c4isrnet.com/cyber/2022/11/22/
sweden-boosts-cyber-defense-spending-with-nato-in-mind/.
52 Ministry of Defense, ‘Defense Buildup Program’, pp. 11–12,
December 2022, https://www.mod.go.jp/j/approach/agenda/
guideline/plan/pdf/program_en.pdf.
53 Ibid.
54 Japan’s 2022 National Security Strategy identified China,
North Korea and Russia as primary threats to its security
interests. See Ministry of Defense, ‘National Security
Strategy’, pp. 8–10.
55 In 2023, Japan announced USD75bn being set aside
to strengthen cyber capabilities in the Indo-Pacific.
Digwatch, ‘Japan to Build Cyber Defense Grid for the
Indo-Pacific’, 31 August 2023, https://dig.watch/updates/
japan-to-build-cyberdefense-grid-for-the-indo-pacific.
56 Reuters, ‘Russian “Hacktivists” Briefly Knock German
Websites Offline’, 26 January 2023, https://www.reuters.com/
world/europe/russian-hacktivists-briefly-knock-german-
websites-offline-2023-01-25/; and AFP, ‘Pro-Russian Hackers
Claim Downing of French Senate Website’, 5 May 2023,
https://www.securityweek.com/pro-russian-hackers-claim-
downing-of-french-senate-website/.
57 Sean Lyngaas, ‘Russian Hackers Targeted European Military
and Transport Organizations in Newly Discovered Spying
Campaign’, CNN, 15 March 2023, https://edition.cnn.
com/2023/03/15/politics/russian-hackers-europe-military-
organizations-microsoft/index.html.
58 See France in the United Kingdom, ‘Orion Exercise Enters Its
Last Phase’, 19 April 2023, https://uk.ambafrance.org/Orion-
2023-military-exercise-enters-its-final-phase. The French
defence ministry stated that the exercise’s cyber component
sought to ‘test the effectiveness and coherence’ of the
Ministry of Armed Forces’ chains of command in terms of
‘defensive cyber warfare’, adding that ‘ORION integrates
the information environment in order to involve actors of
the information warfare and test the coordination of our
effects’. See Ministry of the Armed Forces, ‘Orion 23 Press
Kit’, February 2023, p. 11, https://www.defense.gouv.fr/sites/
default/files/operations/20230228_Press_Kit_Orion.pdf.
59 British Army, ‘ Army Leads Western Europe’s Largest
Cyber Warfare Exercise’, 22 February 2023, https://
www.army.mod.uk/news-and-events/news/2023/02/
defence-cyber-marvel-warfare-exercise/.
60 Ministry of Defense, ‘National Security Strategy’, p. 22. In
2013, Japan adopted the term ‘Flexible Deterrent Options’
from standing US policy that sought to strengthen deterrence
by swift redeployment of military assets or by other forms
of military signalling to convince an adversary of your own
side‘s determination to react with force if necessary.
61 US Cyber Command, ‘“Building Resilience”: U.S. Returns
from Second Defensive Hunt Operation in Lithuania’, 12
September 2023, https://www.cybercom.mil/Media/News/
Article/3522801/building-resilience-us-returns-from-second-
defensive-hunt-operation-in-lithuania/.
62 US European Command Public Affairs, ‘US, Swedish, Finnish
Militaries Join Forces to Defend Cyber Domain’, 16 February
2023, https://www.eucom.mil/article/42276/us-swedish-
finnish-militaries-join-forces-to-defend-cyber-domain.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Impact of the Russia–Ukraine War on National Cyber Planning: A Survey of Ten Countries 19
63 Amazon, ‘Safeguarding Ukraine’s Data to Preserve Its
Present and Build Its Future’, 9 June 2022, https://www.
aboutamazon.com/news/aws/safeguarding-ukraines-data-
to-preserve-its-present-and-build-its-future.
64 Matt Burgess, ‘Hacktivism Is Back and Messier Than Ever’,
27 December 2022, Wired, https://www.wired.co.uk/article/
hacktivism-russia-ukraine-ddos.
65 National Cyber Security Centre, ‘Lindy Cameron at
Chatham House Security and Defence Conference 2022’,
28 September 2022, https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/speech/
lindy-cameron-chatham-house-security-and-defence-
conference-2022.
66 Yale School of Management, ‘Over 1,000 Companies Have
Curtailed Operations in Russia – but Some Remain’, 10
November 2023, https://som.yale.edu/story/2022/over-1000-
companies-have-curtailed-operations-russia-some-remain.
67 National Security College, ‘An Address From GCHQ
Director Sir Jeremy Fleming’, 31 March 2022, https://
nsc.crawford.anu.edu.au/department-news/20103/
address-gchq-director-sir-jeremy-fleming.
68 See International Committee of the Red Cross, ‘Protecting
Civilians Against Digital Threats During Armed Conflict.
Recommendations to States, Belligerents, Tech Companies,
and Humanitarian Organizations’, 2023, https://shop.icrc.
org/download/ebook?sku=4735/002-ebook.
69 Christian Perez and Anjana Nair, ‘Information
Warfare in Russia’s War in Ukraine’, Foreign Policy, 22
August 2022, https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/08/22/
information-warfare-in-russias-war-in-ukraine/.
70 Brian Babcock-Lumish et al., ‘Managing the New Era
of Deterrence and Warfare: Visualizing the Information
Domain’, IBM Center for the Business of Government,
Institute for the Study of War, May 2023, p. 6, https://
www.businessofgovernment.org/sites/default/files/
Managing%20the%20New%20Era%20of%20Deterrence%20
and%20Warfare.pdf; and David Calvo et al., ‘Countering
Disinformation: Improving the Alliance’s Digital Resilience’,
NATO Review, 12 August 2021, https://www.nato.int/docu/
review/articles/2021/08/12/countering-disinformation-
improving-the-alliances-digital-resilience/index.html.
71 Mariusz Antoni Kamiński and Zdzisław Śliwa,
‘Poland’s Threat Assessment: Deepened, Not
Changed’, March 2023, National Defense University
Press, 10 March 2023, https://ndupress.ndu.edu/
Media/News/News-Article-View/Article/3323942/
polands-threat-assessment-deepened-not-changed/;
Finnish Government, ‘Government Report on Finnish
Foreign and Security Policy’, October 2020, p. 21, https://
julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/162515/
VN_2020_32.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y; and Digwatch,
‘Sweden Faces Ongoing Misinformation Campaigns From
Russia and Iran, Warns Minister’, 29 August 2023, https://
dig.watch/updates/sweden-faces-ongoing-misinformation-
campaigns-from-russia-and-iran-warns-minister.
72 Steven Lee Myers, ‘Sweden Is Not Staying Neutral in
Russia’s Information War’, New York Times, 10 August 2023,
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/08/10/technology/sweden-
combat-disinformation.html.
73 Gerard O’Dwyer, ‘NATO Membership to Drive Nordic Cyber
Security Sector Growth’, Computer Weekly, 18 July 2023,
https://www.computerweekly.com/news/366544800/NATO-
membership-to-drive-Nordic-cyber-security-sector-growth; and
Emma Woolacott, ‘Sweden Launches Psychological Defense
Agency to Counter Disinformation’, Forbes, 5 January 2022,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/emmawoollacott/2022/01/05/
sweden-launches-psychological-defense-agency-to-counter-disi
nformation/?sh=566506914874.
74 Government Communication Service, ‘Responding to
Russia’s Invasion’, 24 March 2022, https://gcs.civilservice.
gov.uk/news/responding-to-russias-invasion/.
75 Government Communication Service, ‘RESIST 2 Counter
Disinformation Toolkit’, 2022, https://gcs.civilservice.gov.uk/
publications/resist-2-counter-disinformation-toolkit/.
76 Publications of the Finnish Government, ‘Government
Report on Changes in the Security Environment’,
April 2022, p. 32, https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.
fi/bitstream/handle/10024/164002/VN_2022_20.
pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y.
77 Jenny Gross, ‘How Finland Is Teaching a Generation to
Spot Misinformation’, New York Times, January 2023, https://
www.nytimes.com/2023/01/10/world/europe/finland-
misinformation-classes.html.
78 Steven Lee Myers, ‘US Tries New Tack on Russian
Disinformation: Pre-empting It’, New York Times, 26 October
2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2023/10/26/technology/
russian-disinformation-us-state-department-campaign.html.
79 US Department of State, ‘The Kremlin’s Efforts to Covertly
Spread Disinformation in Latin America’, 7 November 2023,
https://www.state.gov/the-kremlins-efforts-to-covertly-
spread-disinformation-in-latin-america/.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20 The International Institute for Strategic Studies
80 US Department of State, ‘Disarming Disinformation: Our
Shared Responsibility’, 20 October 2023, https://www.state.
gov/disarming-disinformation/.
81 Dorothy Sherwood, ‘Don’t Be a Target: How
to Identify Adversarial Propaganda’, US Cyber
Command, 5 October 2023, https://www.cybercom.
mil/Media/News/Article/3551070/dont-be-a-target-
how-to-identify-adversarial-propaganda/; and
Cyber Security and Infrastructure Agency, ‘Foreign
Information Operations and Disinformation’,
https://www.cisa.gov/topics/election-security/
foreign-influence-operations-and-disinformation.
82 Ines Kagubare, ‘Cyber Command Chief Confirms US Took
Part in Offensive Cyber Operations’, The Hill, 1 June 2022,
https://thehill.com/policy/cybersecurity/3508639-cyber-
command-chief-confirms-us-took-part-in-offensive-cyber-
operations/.
83 NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence,
‘ About NATO StratCom COE’, https://stratcomcoe.org/
about_us/about-nato-stratcom-coe/5.
84 Minister for Foreign Affairs, ‘Cooperation with NATO’s
Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence’, 7 April
2022, https://www.foreignminister.gov.au/minister/
marise-payne/media-release/cooperation-natos-strategic-
communications-centre-excellence.
85 Prime Minister of Canada, ‘Prime Minister Announces
Additional Support for Ukraine’, 23 August 2022,
https://www.pm.gc.ca/en/news/news-releases/2022/08/23/
prime-minister-announces-additional-support-ukraine.
86 Clothilde Goujard, ‘EU to Launch Platform to Fight Russian,
Chinese Disinformation’, Politico, 7 February 2023, https://
www.politico.eu/article/eu-to-launch-platform-to-fight-
russian-chinese-disinformation/.
87 EEAS, ‘1st EEAS Report on Foreign Information
Manipulation and Interference Threats: Towards a
Framework for Networked Defence’, February 2023, https://
euvsdisinfo.eu/uploads/2023/02/EEAS-ThreatReport-
February2023-02.pdf.
88 European Council, ‘Information Manipulation in
Russia’s War of Aggression Against Ukraine’, 28 July
2023, https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/
press-releases/2023/07/28/information-manipulation-in-
russia-s-war-of-aggression-against-ukraine-eu-lists-seven-
individuals-and-five-entities/.
89 Government of Canada, ‘Canada’s Efforts to Counter
Disinformation – Russian Invasion of Ukraine’, 22 December
2022, https://www.international.gc.ca/world-monde/issues_
development-enjeux_developpement/response_conflict-
reponse_conflits/crisis-crises/ukraine-disinfo-desinfo.
aspx?lang=eng.
90 See European Parliament, ‘Special Committee on Foreign
Interference in All Democratic Processes in the European
Union, Including Disinformation and the Strengthening of
Integrity, Transparency and Accountability in the European
Parliament’, 23 October 2023, https://www.europarl.europa.
eu/committees/en/ing2/home/highlights.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
© The International Institute for Strategic Studies, 2023
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – UK
Arundel House | 6 Temple Place | London | wc2r 2pg | UK
t. +44 (0) 20 7379 7676 e. iiss@iiss.org www.iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Americas
2121 K Street, NW | Suite 600 | Washington DC 20037 | USA
t. +1 202 659 1490 e. iiss-americas@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Asia
9 Raffles Place | #49-01 Republic Plaza | Singapore 048619
t. +65 6499 0055 e. iiss-asia@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Europe
Pariser Platz 6A | 10117 Berlin | Germany
t. +49 30 311 99 300 e. iiss-europe@iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies – Middle East
14th floor, GFH Tower | Bahrain Financial Harbour | Manama | Kingdom of Bahrain
t. +973 1718 1155 e. iiss-middleeast@iiss.org
Acknowledgements
IISS–Europe acknowledges the financial support of the
German Federal Foreign Office in producing this research
paper, including for a workshop that helped inform the
paper’s contents.
