
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
A
s advances in synthetic biology accelerate—enabling scientists to design bio-
logical systems from synthetic components—many researchers have begun
to question whether some developments could introduce risks that out-
weigh their benefits. One such development involves the possible creation of
mirror life: a conceivable alternate life form, such as a bacterium, built from proteins
and nucleic acids with the opposite molecular “handedness” from those found in
nature. Some scientists have warned that, if created, mirror life could pose an unprec-
edented global risk, because mirror bacteria could potentially evade human, animal,
and plant immune systems, leading to fatal infections, and society would be unable to
produce sufficient countermeasures at the needed scale. Despite the potential severity
of these concerns, awareness of mirror life remains limited beyond specialist com-
munities, and governments have yet to articulate policy responses—let alone develop
strategies for communicating what mirror life is, what risks it might entail, and how
close current research is to making it possible.
In this paper, we draw on research and our expertise in risk communication to
outline principles that the U.S. and other governments should consider when devel-
oping strategies for communicating about mirror life to the public, research com-
munity, business community, and government agencies. We first establish a baseline
ANDREW M. PARKER, FORREST W. CRAWFORD, GERALD L. EPSTEIN, SELLA NEVO, DAVID GLICKSTEIN, MATTHEW L. NICOTRA,
HENRY H. WILLIS
Principles for Communicating the
Risks of Mirror Life
Expert Insights
PERSPECTIVE ON A TIMELY POLICY ISSUE
July 2026

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
2
Abbreviations
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid
DURC dual-use research of concern
GMO genetically modified organism
NSF National Science Foundation
RNA ribonucleic acid
of core facts about mirror life, including what it is, the risks
it might pose if it were created, and when it might become
reality. We then present the case for a government-led
communications strategy and five principles for effective
communication: (1) accessibility; (2) transparency; (3) use
of analogies when doing so does not introduce distortions;
(4) tailored messages to specific audiences; and (5) antici-
pation of objections, misperceptions, and inaccuracies.
Finally, we outline initial steps governments could pursue
to operationalize these principles.
Facts About Mirror Life, Its
Development, and Potential Risks
Communicating about mirror life will require a basic
understanding of mirror life. We provide an overview of
what it is, the risks it could pose, when it could become
reality, and what factors are driving interest in creating
it. We further establish a baseline of what activities are
underway within the scientific community to address this
emerging risk.
What Is Mirror Life?
Most molecular building blocks necessary for life—known
as biomolecules—have three-dimensional, asymmetric struc-
tures that are different from their mirror images, much like
left hands differ from right hands. Deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA), ribonucleic acid (RNA), proteins, and many other
biological molecules have this property, called chirality. All
life on Earth is composed of biomolecules with only one of
these two possible orientations. A mirror organism created
through synthetic biology techniques would have molecular
components that are mirror images of those found in nature
and would constitute mirror life. For example, all known life
uses proteins built from left-handed amino acids, whereas
nucleic acids—DNA and RNA—are constructed from right-
handed sugars. A mirror organism, by contrast, would rely
on right-handed proteins and left-handed nucleic acids: a
mirror image of natural biology.
Although mirror life could theoretically include multi
-
cel
lular organisms, such as a mirror dog or cat, scientists
believe that the first instance of mirror life is likely to be a
bacterium—a single-cell organism—because of its relative
biological simplicity.
What Risks Could Mirror Life Present to
Humanity and the Environment?
In a recent publication, a group of experts and concerned
scientists argued that the creation of mirror life would
hold significant risks for human, animal, and plant life, as
well as the broader ecosystems of Earth (Adamala, Agashe,
Binder, et al., 2024).
Many scientists worry that, because natural life has
never encountered mirror life before, existing biologi-

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
3
cal defenses would struggle to fight it effectively. This is
because the opposite chirality of mirror bacteria would
likely disrupt or impair the immune defenses of humans,
plants, and animals. Moreover, mechanisms that normally
limit the growth of bacteria in the environment—viral
infection and predation—also would likely be impaired
by the opposite chirality of mirror bacteria. In the absence
of effective immune defenses or natural predators, mirror
organisms might spread widely, causing fatal infections
among many or most multicellular organisms.
Concerned scientists also question whether society
could develop and deploy countermeasures sufficient to
protect humanity if mirror bacteria were created. Although
some existing antibiotics are not sensitive to chirality
and would thus be expected to kill mirror bacteria, most
existing antibiotics are designed to fit the biology of natu-
ral organisms and would probably be ineffective against
mirror bacteria. It might be possible to make new anti
-
bi
otics targeting mirror bacteria, but scientists doubt such
countermeasures could be developed, manufactured, and
distributed at the speed and scale necessary to prevent
irreversible harm. Moreover, even if society were able to
protect humans with medical countermeasures, this effort
would do little to mitigate potentially catastrophic impacts
on plants and animals that underpin global ecosystems and
food systems.
Given that mirror life does not yet exist, scientists
cannot be certain about the magnitude of these risks. The
only way to directly assess them would be to create mirror
organisms and test their survivability in the environment
and against immune systems and pharmaceuticals. This,
however, presents a dangerous paradox: If mirror life is
as hazardous as theorized, the very act of testing it could
create the risk such experiments are intended to assess.
For this reason, many concerned scientists believe that the
most effective defense against mirror life is to prevent its
creation; by the time its risks are empirically demonstrated,
it may be too late for humanity to avoid catastrophe.
Although scientists generally view the creation
of mirror life as posing potentially catastrophic risks,
they tend to agree that research focused on mirror
biomolecules—mirror DNA and mirror proteins—does
not, on its own, carry comparable dangers. Mirror thera-
peutics are being pursued today because they offer some
Most molecular building blocks necessary for life—
known as biomolecules —have three-dimensional,
asymmetric structures that are different from their mirror
images, much like left hands differ from right hands.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
4
advantages over normal (nonmirror) drugs. Efforts to
explore their potential as therapeutics and diagnostics
constitute legitimate research and should continue. Should
decisionmakers consider how best to address the risks
of mirror life, they will need to distinguish research on
mirror biomolecules from efforts that assemble these com-
ponents into a mirror organism.
When Could Mirror Life Become Reality?
Mirror life does not currently exist. However, research in
mirror biology (and synthetic biology more generally) has
made it conceivable to some scientists that a living mirror
cell could be created within ten to 30 years. Some scientists
estimate that, within a decade, new tools from synthetic
biology could enable the construction of a living cell from
synthetic nonliving parts, and following the same tech-
niques with mirror parts could potentially produce a syn-
thetic mirror cell (Adamala, Agashe, Belkaid, et al., 2024;
Adamala, Agashe, Binder, et al., 2024).
Researchers have already synthesized mirror ver-
sions of important biomolecules, such as mirror DNA and
mirror proteins. Furthermore, scientists have made partial
progress toward certain steps or processes that will likely
be required to create mirror bacteria, such as chemically
synthesizing a genome and recoding a bacterial genome
(Hutchison et al., 2016; Fredens et al., 2019). However, pro-
ducing a viable, self-reproducing mirror organism likely
remains years or decades away (Adamala, Agashe, Belkaid,
et al., 2024; Adamala, Agashe, Binder, et al., 2024).
Because mirror life would be a human-made life form,
its emergence would depend on the scale and persistence
of scientific effort, including funding, personnel, and
institutional support. Publicly available evidence suggests
that only a small number of research teams worldwide has
pursued advanced work in mirror biology, and that, as of
June 2026, there are no active research programs with the
explicit goal of creating mirror life (Paris Conference on
Risks from Mirror Life, 2025).
Advances in synthetic biology, biotechnology, or arti-
ficial intelligence could significantly accelerate progress
and reduce the financial barriers to developing mirror life.
One expert has estimated that a mirror cell could be devel-
oped for approximately $500 million over the next decade,
assuming a direct and transparent effort (Kubota, 2024).
This cost could decrease because of improvements in bio-
technology or new discoveries in synthetic biology.
Why Is There Interest in Mirror Life?
Many experts think, based on current knowledge, that
the risks of mirror life outweigh the benefits. That said,
some scientists have pursued advances in mirror biology to
Research in mirror biology
has made it conceivable
to some scientists that
a living mirror cell could
be created within ten to
30 years.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
5
explore potential diagnostic or therapeutic benefits. They
have proposed commercial or medical uses—not for mirror
life itself but for its subcellular components, such as mirror
proteins or mirror DNA. These mirror biomolecules could,
for example, improve diagnostics or therapeutics by reduc-
ing immune system responses and increasing stability in
the body because of their mirror chirality (Harrison et al.,
2023; Schearer et al., 2024).
By contrast, mirror life—a distinct and more advanced
concept—refers to self-sustaining cells that assemble
mirror versions of these components. Scientists have
hypothesized few beneficial uses for such organisms (Ada-
mala, Agashe, Binder, et al., 2024). Although no current
projects to create mirror life are known to be underway
in the United States or elsewhere in the world, the U.S.
government in the past has funded fundamental synthetic
biology research aimed at pursuing mirror life (National
Science Foundation [NSF], 2014a; NSF, 2014b NSF, 2019).
Given the limited perceived practical benefits of synthesiz-
ing a mirror cell, actors who pursue it have been motivated
by broader, fundamental goals. For example, synthesizing
a mirror cell would constitute a major scientific break-
through, and some researchers believe that the discovery
may reveal insights into the chiral origins of life on Earth
(Adamala, Agashe, Belkaid, et al., 2024; Adamala, Agashe,
Binder, et al., 2024).
How Is the Scientific Community
Addressing Potential Risks?
Concerned about the potential risks of mirror life, interna-
tional scientists and experts are increasingly recommend-
ing that research intended to create mirror life not be per-
mitted (Adamala, Agashe, Belkaid, et al., 2024). In January
2025, the UK Government Office for Science convened an
expert roundtable to advise policymakers on the feasibility,
potential benefits, and risks of mirror life, including self-
replicating mirror cells, and it recommended taking steps
to prevent such creation (UK Government Office for Sci-
ence, 2025). At recent conferences at the Asilomar Confer-
ence Grounds in Pacific Grove, California; the University
of Manchester, United Kingdom; and the Institut Pasteur
in Paris, France, hundreds of experts shared the concerns
that have been raised about mirror life and endorsed the
need for governance (The Spirit of Asilomar and the Future
of Biotechnology Summit, 2025; Institut Pasteur, 2025;
University of Manchester, 2025). The National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (undated) held a
workshop in September 2025 focused on risk assessment,
governance options, and advancing responsible science
domestically and internationally. In September 2025, an
independent investigation from Germany’s Central Com-
mission for Biological Safety endorsed the severity of the
risk, and the UNESCO International Bioethics Committee
proposed a precautionary global moratorium on creating
mirror cells (Zentrale Kommission für die Biologische
Sicherheit, 2025). The Carnegie Endowment for Interna-
tional Peace hosted a gathering of scientific, policy, and
security experts, who recommended that the scientific
community clearly and accurately communicate the risks
of mirror bacteria to key stakeholders, that funders refrain
from supporting research aimed at creating mirror life, and
that policymakers engage diverse stakeholders to establish
policies preventing its creation (Cuéllar, Hinderstein, and
Relman, 2025). RAND publications—Policy Options to
Prevent the Creation of Mirror Organisms (Epstein, Craw-

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
6
ford, and Nevo, 2025) and A U.S. Strategy to Prevent the
Creation of Mirror Life (Kalra et al., forthcoming)—provide
recommendations for addressing the potential threat from
mirror life. Together, these initiatives aim to inform policy
deliberations and promote safe research while mitigating
catastrophic risks of mirror life.
Not all scientists agree on the timing of policy mea-
sures to mitigate the risks of mirror life, and some have
stated that a ban on mirror life is premature because its
creation remains a distant prospect (Peplow, 2025; Ser-
vice, 2024). However, given the potential for catastrophic
consequences—even if unlikely in the near term—early
dialogue on how governments might implement policies to
prevent mirror life, including how they communicate its
risks to the broader public, is warranted.
Why and How Should the
U.S. Government Pursue a
Communications Strategy on the
Risks of Mirror Life?
Should governments begin implementing policies to pre-
vent the creation of mirror life or mitigate its risks, they
will likely require a communications strategy that effec-
tively engages the public and key stakeholders. Policy
success may depend on the public’s willingness to act
in coordinated and specific ways, such as adopting new
norms or accepting restrictions on certain activities. Build-
ing public understanding and addressing misinformation
could help build trust in government officials and legiti-
macy for policy actions, helping with policy implementa-
tion and potentially combating politicization. Likewise,
policies targeting private industry and academic institu-
tions to prevent mirror life may require leaders to accept
constraints on research and development. Such collective
action requires not only clear guidance but also broad
understanding and trust.
Achieving this effort will demand a communications
strategy attuned to how people and organizations perceive
and respond to risk, shaped by complex and interconnected
analytic, emotional, and social processes. For instance,
when the public perceives risks as deeply uncertain or
dreaded—as in the case of mirror life, which may be
seen as uncontrollable, unjust, or threatening to future
generations—people may exhibit stronger, more polar-
ized reactions, jeopardizing coordinated responses (Slovic,
2020; Slovic, 1987). To be effective, communications must
therefore account for individual traits that influence how
people assess risks and proposed responses, including their
educational backgrounds, personalities, ethical views,
community norms, lived experiences with risk, their trust
in authorities, and their sense of personal and economic
capacity to act (Fischhoff, 1985). Similarly, communica-
tions aimed at organizations, such as businesses or research
institutions, must consider what incentives or factors
influence their decisionmaking, such as pursuing prestige,
generating profits, or advancing social well-being. Under-
standing how these factors influence risk perceptions and
decisionmaking can help shape a communications strategy
that supports the public’s informational needs for making
informed, constructive decisions (Fischhoff, 1995; Slovic,
1987; Slovic, 2020; Fischhoff, Slovic, and Lichtenstein, 1982;
Wachinger et al., 2013).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
7
Five Principles for Communicating
Risks of Mirror Life
In this paper, we outline five communication principles
for (1) explaining mirror life and its risks and (2) framing
policy proposals to guard against those risks (see Figure 1).
These principles can help guide risk communicators in
speaking with the public, scientists, businesses, and gov-
ernment agencies that could be tasked with implementing
policies to respond to the threat of mirror life. We pro-
vide recommended language for describing the science of
mirror biology, describe potential analogies to other kinds
of threats while carefully noting when these analogies may
be counterproductive, and offer ways of addressing confu-
sion and concerns about mirror life, research into mirror
life, and governance proposals.
Our recommendations are based on the technical
findings about the risks of mirror life (Adamala, Agashe,
Belkaid, et al., 2024; Adamala, Agashe, Binder, et al., 2024),
as well as research on effective risk communication about
threats to public health and security (Bartolucci et al., 2023;
Fischhoff, 1995; Fischhoff, Brewer, and Downs, 2011; Pid-
geon, 2021; Steratore et al., 2023; Warren and Duckett, 2026).

Most molecules needed for life, such as proteins and DNA, have
three-dimensional structures that differ from their mirror image.
Life on Earth uses only one orientation of these molecules. In the
future, scientists might be able to create a mirror cell in a lab. It
would work like a natural cell but would have proteins and DNA
shaped in the opposite way.
Using plain
language to
describe
mirror life
Technical aspects of mirror life development, detailed time-
lines to mirror life creation, and specific policy recommen-
dations are beyond the scope of this paper.
1. Be Clear by Describing the Facts and
Risks in an Accessible Way
A core principle of risk communication is bridging the
gap between what people currently understand and what
they need to know to make informed decisions about
risk (Morgan et al., 2001). Early statements on mirror life
should quickly orient audiences to the key facts, terminol-
ogy, and potential risks of mirror life. When communicat-
ing the scientific facts about mirror life to nonspecialists,
messengers should use plain language and avoid jargon
and complex scientific descriptions (Fischhoff, Brewer, and
Downs, 2011).
Messengers should opt for simpler language and avoid
inaccessible terms that are likely unfamiliar to most people.
For instance, instead of saying “enantiomer,” communica-
tors can use “mirror-image molecule.” Table 1 provides
several accessible vocabulary alternatives relevant to mirror
biology that may aid public discussion. While these terms

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
8
FIGURE 1
Communication Principles for Explaining Mirror Life to the Public
Be clear
Describe the facts and risks in an accessible way, without jargon.
Be transparent
Be open about what is known and unknown about the risks and where value judgments must be
made, refrain from masking uncertainty, and emphasize the importance of alternative viewpoints.
Use analogies
Guide audiences toward more-useful analogies; in circumstances in which analogies are not
counterproductive, make sure to explain their limitations.
Tailor to audience
Craft strategies to provide understandable and actionable guidance relevant for different
audiences with distinct priorities, knowledge, and context, and then test communication needs
and messages among the intended audiences.
Anticipate objections, misperceptions, and inaccuracies
Preemptively acknowledge commonly challenged or misunderstood views and actively counter
false information by providing explanations of inaccuracies and alternative viewpoints.
1
2
3
4
5

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
9
offer useful starting points for initial conversations, further
research should assess their accessibility and identify addi-
tional definitions or descriptions best suited for informing
the public.
2. Be Transparent About Risks, Value
Judgments, and Uncertainty
Communicators of the risks of mirror life should strive for
transparency with the general public and other audiences,
because transparency increases the credibility of commu-
nication and conveys respect for the audience (U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, 2025; Federal Emergency
Management Agency, 2024; Fischhoff, Brewer, and Downs,
2011). They should be open about the current status and
trajectory of mirror life development, the uncertainty of its
risks and policy responses, any value judgments, the extent
of scientific consensus, and key context surrounding the
underlying evidence.
Status and trajectory: Messengers should aim to
clearly share what is known regarding progress in mirror
life research and what developments might unfold in the
future (Fischhoff, 1995; Fischhoff, Brewer, and Downs,
2011). In current communications, they should stress that
mirror life does not yet exist but could be created in the
next ten to 30 years. Communicators should be aware that
different people may interpret verbal probabilistic state-
ments (e.g., the term unlikely) differently. Best practices
suggest incorporating quantitative estimates or ranges
where possible (Budescu and Wallsten, 1995; Wallsten
et al., 1993). That said, many current uncertainties may be
profound, preventing numeric estimates.
TABLE 1
Potential Accessible Alternatives to Terms
That May Emerge in Technical Discussions of
Mirror Bacteria
Inaccessible
Examples of Potential Accessible
Alternatives
Chirality Handedness; a feature of an object that
makes its mirror image different from the
original
Chiral molecule A molecule with an asymmetric,
three-dimensional shape, like left and right
hands; a left- or right-handed molecule
Amino acid, peptide Building block or piece that makes up
proteins; a protein unit
Antigen A substance that an immune system reacts
to; an immune system trigger
Antibody A molecule that helps the immune system
fight foreign substances; an immune
system defender
Auxotroph An organism designed to be dependent on
nutrients that are only provided in the lab
Immunogenic Capable of causing an immune system
response; immune system–activating
Enantiomer One of the two possible mirror-image
forms of a molecule
Genome An organism’s genetic material; the full set
of DNA or RNA
Nucleic acid DNA or RNA
Nucleotide,
oligonucleotide
Building block or piece that makes up DNA
or RNA; a DNA or RNA unit
Ribosome,
polymerase, etc.
Molecules in cells that perform specific
roles; molecular machines
Phage, bacteriophage Virus that infects bacteria

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
10
Uncertainty of risks and policy responses: Commu -
nicators should be open with the public about uncertain-
ties surrounding the risks of mirror life and the potential
effectiveness of policy responses, avoiding exaggeration.
They can frame these uncertainties as an opportunity to
reinforce their commitment to discourse and openness to
new evidence (Fischhoff, 1995).
Value judgments: Communicators should, in general,
aim to avoid imposing value judgments in their messaging
to the public. An important goal of risk communication
is to inform and empower people to make decisions based
on their own values and support policy discussions that
reflect those values. This goal contrasts with communica -
tion intended to influence or pressure people to accept a
decision or policy (Fischhoff, 1995). However, the individ -
uals communicating risks are often the very same people,
such as political or government leaders, who are respon -
sible for implementing policies that rest on value judg -
ments, such as the need to save as many lives as possible.
In these cases, communicators should, at a minimum, be
transparent about values underpinning their messaging
and policy proposals.
Extent of scientific consensus: To further ensure trans-
parency, communicators should clearly convey the extent of
scientific consensus and attribute claims directly to sources.
For example, highlighting broad agreement among scien-
tists about the risks of mirror life can help convey the cred-
ibility of these risks. Conversely, when consensus is lacking,
acknowledging differing perspectives can foster public trust
and reinforce the legitimacy of the messaging (Fischhoff,
1995; Fischhoff, Brewer, and Downs, 2011).
Context surrounding evidence: When relevant, com-
municators should be transparent about the U.S. govern-
ment’s relationship to specific claims and processes. For
example, communications might explain that the U.S.
government learned about possible mirror life threats from
external scientists, that those scientists made the initial
announcement, and that the government is now evaluating
those claims. Messengers should clarify the level of cred-
ibility assigned to such claims, whether by the U.S. govern-
ment as a whole or by specific agencies.

Mirror life does not currently exist. However, research
programs have made progress in creating some of the mirror
molecules that could one day be used to create a mirror cell.
Scientists are not likely to create mirror life in the next ten
years. Beyond that, the timeline is unknown.
Being clear about the
current status and
trajectory of mirror
life development

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
11
3. Guide Audiences Toward Analogies
When Useful and Explain Their Limitations
To help the public understand mirror life, its risks, and
potential policies, messengers can use analogies to more
familiar or similar-seeming technologies and risks. When
first introduced to the topic, audiences are likely to anchor
their opinions to these comparisons (Bostrom, 2011;
Gentner and Holyoak, 1997). The news media, which often
relies on analogies as powerful explanatory tools, can help
reinforce these initial impressions (Edwards, 2003), as can
social media.
However, using analogies also presents pitfalls. The
threats potentially posed by mirror life are unique and
unprecedented, so there are no close analogies. Any analogy
will inevitably have aspects that do not apply to mirror life,
meaning that drawing on those analogies risks distorting
understanding, whether intentionally or not (Bostrom, 2011).

Therefore, communicators should pair analogies with clear
explanations of how mirror life differs from the example.
We recommend guiding audiences toward more-
illuminating and more-useful analogies, avoiding mislead-
ing or less relevant ones, and being prepared to discuss
the limitations of analogies that arise (Bruine de Bruin,
Carman, and Parker, 2021). Useful analogies do not need to
be biological or health related, for example, if they provide
helpful policy solution parallels. No analogy will be perfect;
some may be accurate in their characterization of a threat
but inaccurate in their implied set of solutions.

A group of experts and concerned scientists warns that
creating mirror life could be dangerous for humans, animals, and
plants. Most scientists who have worked in mirror life research
recommend halting efforts to create it.
Communicating
the extent of
scientific consensus
Mirror bacteria could spread widely. Their mirror image
might protect them against immune systems, medicines, or
natural enemies.
Because mirror life does not yet exist, the risks are not
certain. However, many experts agree that they are serious
enough to take precautions.
Communicating
uncertainty and
credibility of
evidence

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
12
Communicators should anticipate audiences forming
their own analogies. In such cases, they should avoid ignor-
ing or summarily dismissing them, which may backfire,
and instead use this as an opportunity to both head off
analogies commonly referenced by audiences that do not
align well with actual risk while promoting better-aligned
analogies (Bruine de Bruin, Carman, and Parker, 2021).
Analogizing the Risks of Mirror Life
Analogies can help the public grasp the risks and scale of
mirror life (Bostrom, 2011; Gentner and Holyoak, 1997).
For instance, communicators might compare its potential
societal impacts with those of drug-resistant superbugs
(see Figure 2), invasive species (see Figure 3), or even non-
biological catastrophic risks, such as nuclear weapons or
climate change.
By comparing mirror life with superbugs, commu-
nicators can help the public understand how mirror life
could spread rapidly, be difficult or impossible to treat, and
require global cooperation to manage its risks. However,
because the analogy is imperfect, it may risk leading the
public to incorrect conclusions (for instance, that mirror
life could originate spontaneously from nature). Therefore,
communicators should clarify these distinctions, empha-
sizing that mirror life requires deliberate human engineer-
ing and that many experts support preventing its creation.
Other possible biology-related analogies include the
following:
•
 Ge
netically modified organisms (GMOs):
Although it is almost certainly a poor analogy, some
members of the public might compare mirror life to
GMOs, given that both result from human interven-
tion and do not naturally occur in the environment
(U.S. Food and Drug Administration, undated).
Communications surrounding this analogy should
emphasize that public perceptions of GMO-related
risks often differ significantly from expert assess-
ments and, in any case, do not convey mirror life’s
potentially catastrophic risks to society.
•
 Pr
ions: Both prions and mirror life involve unusual
molecular structures that defy traditional biology,
are difficult to detect, and pose serious, poorly
understood health risks with no known cure.
Prions—responsible for such diseases as bovine
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD)—are misfolded
proteins that induce similar misfolding in other
proteins (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention, undated). However, prions are likely far less
transmissible than mirror life could be, cause harm
through a very different mechanism, and remain
rare in humans.
Analogies might also draw from other, nonbiological
domains that are likely to be broadly familiar to the public,
such as the following:
•
 Oz
one depletion and climate change: These envi-
ronmental challenges offer a useful analogy for
mirror life in terms of risk management: Both involve
human-caused threats that likely require sustained
global cooperation to address. However, these analo-
gies are less effective when considering how the risks
originate. Ozone depletion and climate change stem
from countless individual and institutional actions
around the world, while mirror life could emerge

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
13
FIGURE 2
Mirror Life vs. Drug-Resistant Superbugs
Drug-Resistant Superbugs
Superbugs are bacteria,
viruses, or fungi that are
resistant to the most common
antimicrobial medicines used
to fight infections. Examples
include methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), vancomycin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(VRSA), and extensively
drug-resistant tuberculosis
(XDR-TB).
How They Are Similar to Mirror Life
• Both are biology-based threats that could spread rapidly and be
difficult or even impossible to treat.
• Both could be theoretically created in a single laboratory.
• Both could demand sustained global cooperation for prevention
and mitigation.
How They Are Different from Mirror Life
Superbugs Mirror Life
• Already exist and can arise
naturally; emerged from
routine use of medicines,
such as antibiotics
• Are a widespread danger,
primarily to humans
• Do face some existing
countermeasures
• Are often studied to help
treat superbug infections
• Does not yet exist; it will not arise
without human engineering through
concerted scientific effort
• Could potentially cause the
complete devastation of most life
and be far worse than superbugs
• Has no confirmed
countermeasures; superbug
countermeasures are unlikely to
work against mirror life
• Experts recommend against
creating mirror life, including
treatment research
SOURCE: Features information from National Institutes of Health, 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
14
FIGURE 3
Mirror Life vs. Invasive Species
Invasive Species
Invasive species are
non-native organisms
(usually plants and animals)
introduced to an ecosystem
that can cause harm to
native organisms or the
local environment.
How They Are Similar to Mirror Life
• Both have the potential to spread rapidly by evading predation by
native organisms.
• Both could affect humans, animals, and plants and could contaminate
soil and water sources.
• Both could kill native organisms by outcompeting them for resources.
How They Are Different from Mirror Life
• Can disrupt ecosystems
and cause death or
extinction of some species
• May be vulnerable to some
predation and defenses
from local species
• Are limited in the extent
of their propagation
• Has the potential for complete
devastation of life; could be far
worse than invasive species
• Is unlikely to be vulnerable to
the vast majority of predation
and defenses; potentially
unrecognizable or undetectable
to natural immune systems
• Could spread widely with
no known limits
Invasive Species Mirror Life
SOURCE: Features information from U.S. Department of Agriculture, undated.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
15
from a single laboratory. Additionally, environ-
mental risks are generally more gradual in impact,
less conceivable to result in human extinction, and
more reversible than the potential consequences of
mirror life (Adamala, Agashe, Belkaid, et al., 2024;
UK Department for Environment, Food & Rural
Affairs, undated).
1
• Nuclear weapons: B oth nuclear weapons and
mirror life carry the potential to cause massive and
catastrophic destruction, making nuclear weapons a
potentially effective analogy for illustrating mirror
life’s possible devastation.
2 However, unleashing
nuclear devastation at a global scale likely requires
exquisite intentional use of a nuclear weapons arse-
nal sized on the order of the peak of global nuclear
weapon inventories in the 20th century,
3 whereas
triggering the effects of mirror life might, in the
long run, only require the actions of one or a small
group of actors. It is also technically possible to have
a geographically limited use of nuclear weapons—
one that would not be globally catastrophic. Spread
of mirror organisms may not be geographically
bounded. Furthermore, unlike nuclear weapons,
mirror organisms have not been created and tested,
so there is greater uncertainty about the impacts
that the release of mirror bacteria would cause.
Communicators can also draw on fictional or hypo-
thetical scenarios. Often not grounded in real-world threats,
such fantastical narratives may nevertheless have shaped
perceptions among the audience about the nature of global
risk, and they may help convey the potential scale of devasta-
tion posed by mirror life, particularly given the absence of
direct historical parallels. However, communicators should
be cautious not to overstate these fictional cases’ similarities
to mirror life, articulating differences to maintain trust and
credibility. Possible examples include the following:
•
 “Gr
ay goo”: This theoretical scenario, in which
self-replicating nanorobots escape human control
and turn all matter into copies of themselves, can
serve as an analogy for mirror life, illustrating how
uncontrolled replication of a novel life form could
pose existential threats (Drexler, 1992).
•
 The
 Andromeda Strain: This novel by Michael
Crichton (1969) describes a microscopic alien life
form that can propagate and cause harm—not by
specifically attacking normal living systems in the
way natural pathogens would, but by reproducing
in ways that harm those normal living systems. In
the story, the strain behaves similarly to mirror life:
Human immune systems cannot fight it, and ordi-
nary medical countermeasures are ineffective.
•
 “I
ce-nine”: From Kurt Vonnegut’s Cat’s Cradle
(1963), this fictional substance crystalizes liquid
water on contact. In the story, scientists realize the
use of the substance would solidify the oceans and
kill all life on Earth. Fictional ice-nine is not a living
organism, but its rapid spread has catastrophic con-
sequences from a single point of contact with the
ocean.
•
 Ju
rassic Park: This 1990 Crichton novel, and
subsequent film, depicts scientists reviving dino-
saurs using DNA recovered from fossilized amber,
supplemented with modern frog DNA to fill genetic
gaps. Although the project’s founder pursues de-
extinction out of scientific curiosity, prestige, and
profit, the breakthrough leads to unintended, cata-

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
16
strophic consequences when the dinosaurs unex-
pectedly reproduce. This dynamic reflects concerns
about mirror life: Once new life can replicate, con-
taining its spread might prove impossible.
Table 2 serves as a reference tool to help communica-
tors quickly assess which aspects of commonly used analo-
gies are similar to mirror life and where key differences lie.
By outlining points of overlap and distinction, this table
TABLE 2
How Mirror Life Compares with Other Risks
Category Characteristic Mirror Life
Drug-Resistant
Superbugs
Invasive
Species GMOs Prions
Depleted Ozone/
Climate Change
Nuclear
Weapons
Status Theoretically possible ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Currently nonexistent ✔  
Origin Stems from biology ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔    
Manmade ✔     ✔   ✔ ✔
Can be created in a
single lab
✔ ✔   ✔ ✔    
Effects Unknown risks ✔            
Effects could be
irreversible
✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Potential for rapid
spread
✔ ✔ ✔ ✔      
Can also affect plants
and animals
✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
Can cause total global
devastation
✔         ✔ ✔
Governance
and use
Requires ongoing
global cooperation
✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
17
can guide more accurate risk communication and analogy
selection.
Analogizing Policy Responses to Mirror Life
In addition to illustrating potential risks, analogies can
help explain policy options for preventing mirror life–
related threats to civilization. For instance, in describing
a pause or prohibition on research that would enable or
create mirror life, communicators may reference efforts to
manage other catastrophic risks, such as a ban on weather
weapons during the 1970s (see Figure 4). This example
highlights a past international initiative in which states
agreed to prohibit technologies before they exist, as would
be the case with a mirror life ban. However, communica-
tors should articulate a clear difference: Whereas motiva-
tions to produce weather weapons would likely have been
FIGURE 4
Weather Weapon Policy as an Analogue for Managing Mirror Life
Weather Weapons
In the 1970s, the United
States and the Soviet
Union (along with other
countries) agreed to ban
environmental modification
for the purpose of causing
damage or destruction.
How It Could Apply to Mirror Life
Policies addressing the threat of mirror life could involve international
agreements, such as those used to ban weather weapons. The
Environmental Modification Treaty bans the “military or any other hostile
use of environmental modification techniques having widespread,
long-lasting or severe effects as the means of destruction, damage or
injury to any other State Party.” Similar to mirror life, weather weapons
did not exist at the time of the ban (and still do not), but if they did, they
would likely pose “widespread, long-lasting or severe” risks.
Why It Might Not Apply to Mirror Life
The destructive potential of mirror life could far exceed any particular use
of a weather weapon, if such existed. That said, the primary concern
today centers on the development of mirror life for scientific purposes
rather than as a weapon. International agreement aimed at prevention
would likely apply to all research that would enable or create mirror life
and not be limited to military applications.
SOURCE: Features information from the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques, 1977.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
18
driven by military objectives, creation of mirror life may
result from civil or scientific goals, and coordinating a
global response to a perceived civil matter might prove
more difficult.
Rather than an outright global ban on mirror life
research, policymakers could pursue a narrower approach,
such as controls on dual-use research of concern (DURC)
(see Figure 5). When drawing this analogy, communicators
FIGURE 5
DURC Policy as an Analogue for Managing Mirror Life
Dual-Use Research of Concern (DURC)
Key U.S. policies aim to govern DURC, which
encompasses scientific research with both
significant societal benefits and the potential
for serious misuse. Per these policies, the
government conducts case-by-case review
of proposals to weigh the potential risks and
benefits and decides whether it is
worthwhile to conduct or fund the research
and how to mitigate risks.
How It Could Apply to Mirror Life
As the government's mechanism for overseeing
potentially risky research, DURC policies could naturally
extend to research that could enable the creation of
mirror life.
Why It Might Not Apply to Mirror Life
Unlike much dual-use research that promises significant
societal benefits—such as advances in prescription
medications—the development of mirror life presents
risks that far outweigh any potential gain. For that
reason, policy proposals to address research that would
create mirror organisms would likely take the form of
comprehensive research or funding bans. However,
much of the research that could enable the eventual
creation of mirror organisms—even if that were not its
objective—may have value in other applications.
Governing this type of research will likely require the
establishment of red lines beyond which research would
not be permitted, together with the need for
case-by-case review and approval of research that
approaches or circumvents those lines.
SOURCE: Features information from Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response, undated.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
19
should emphasize a key distinction: Many defend DURC
as research on technologies whose benefits outweigh their
risks, whereas scientific consensus suggests that mirror life
research carries costs that far surpass its expected benefits.
4. Tailor Communication Strategies for
Different Audiences
The creation of mirror life may require messengers to
communicate about the facts, risks, and policy proposals
to multiple audiences, tailoring their messaging for each.
Fundamentally, risk communication surrounding mirror
life will need to bridge technical and nontechnical audi-
ences (Steratore et al., 2023). While some messages may
be primarily relevant to only select groups (e.g., business,
research institutions, or government agencies), other mes-
sages, such as the government’s focus on public and envi-
ronmental safety, will be important for everyone.
Customizing for each audience: Effective communi-
cation should address the unique informational needs of
each audience (Bartolucci et al., 2023). For example, com-
munications to the general public will likely require clear,
accessible explanations of what mirror life is, why it mat-
ters, and what society can do to protect itself against risks.
Within this audience, specific groups may have particular
concerns, hold common misconceptions, or face knowl-
edge gaps tied to their individual or community context
(Morgan et al., 2001). For instance, environmental con-
servationists may worry about the potential for ecosystem
devastation resulting from the accidental release of mirror
life, while biotechnology investors may be concerned about
restrictive policies affecting innovation progress. Effec-
tive strategies for meeting audience needs often involve
engaging with them directly (Kousky and Shabman, 2015;
Pidgeon, 2021; Steratore et al., 2023; Warren and Duckett,
2026), learning their communication and decisionmaking
priorities (Árvai, 2014), and codeveloping message strategy
and content (Warren and Duckett, 2026). Finally, rigor-
ous message testing with the intended audience rather than
with experts, as well as ongoing monitoring and evaluation,
can help align messaging with audience needs and commu-
nication preferences (Fischhoff, Brewer, and Downs, 2011;
Helmus, Hiatt, and Becerra-Ornelas, 2022; Morgan et al.,
2001; Steratore et al., 2023).
Deploying different messengers: Audiences respond
better to credible and trusted messengers (Balog-Way,
McComas, and Besley, 2020; Bartolucci et al., 2023), espe-
cially with novel threats (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, 2016; Siegrist, 2021), and dif-
ferent audiences may respond better to different messen-
gers. For example, scientific and business audiences may
be more receptive to communications from scientists and
business leaders. The general public may place greater trust
in local community and political leaders, making educa-
tion of these leaders a potentially valuable communica-
tion channel. In the current climate of partisan rhetoric,
using a bipartisan or nonpartisan voice, if possible, may be
important.
In Figure 6, we provide recommended language for
setting expectations about the emergence and risks of
mirror life, along with example messengers likely to reso-
nate with each audience.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
20
FIGURE 6
Recommended Language and Example Messengers to Set Expectations
Communicating
to the
general public Today, people do not need to act on their own, because mirror life will not appear soon. It
cannot form naturally, and even expert scientists cannot make it yet. However, the risks, if not
refuted, are serious. Therefore, the U.S. and other governments will need new policies to
manage those risks. We encourage people to stay informed on the latest developments for
handling this unique challenge. —U.S. federal public health messenger
Communicating
to federal
agencies U.S. government agencies might be tasked with implementing aspects of a public policy or
regulatory response to prevent development of mirror life. Relevant agencies could include
scientific funding and research agencies, regulatory agencies, and advisory bodies. The
administration could also explore collaboration with foreign governments and international
organizations. —White House messenger
Communicating
to the business
community Research on mirror biomolecules might lead to useful commercial products. However, this work
does not require creating mirror life—and it should not lead there. Creating mirror life for any
purpose could make it much easier for someone to build a version that could end most life on
Earth. Because of this risk, we are working with experts and scientists to determine how far
mirror biomolecule research can go before it gets too close to creating mirror life. Many experts
believe that the possible benefits of mirror life could be achieved in other, safer ways. Policy
responses should stay narrow and targeted. This approach would reduce risks without slowing
innovation or fair competition. Businesses should also take part in policy discussions and share
what they know about the risks and the pace of progress in synthetic biology. —Business
community messenger

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
21
5. Anticipate Objections, Misperceptions,
and Inaccuracies
As seen in past health crises, efforts to manage risks may
prompt public objections, including those based on mis-
conceptions or misunderstandings (American Psycho-
logical Association, 2024; Bateman and Jackson, 2024).
Messengers will likely need to anticipate these objections
and pursue strategies that acknowledge concerns without
alienating the public. Confrontational approaches, such
as debating or criticizing, can backfire, prompting defen-
siveness or entrenched beliefs. Instead, messengers should
convey respect and empathy and aim to appeal to deeper
emotions that may be driving objections (Bateman and
Jackson, 2024).
Additional strategies may include using clear labels to
help the public identify inaccurate information, relying on
appropriate and trusted messengers (e.g., experts or other
nonpartisan figures) and “prebunking” by providing accu-
rate information before objections can emerge and gain
traction (Bateman and Jackson, 2024; American Psycho-
logical Association, 2024).
Although popular objections have yet to emerge
in broad public discussions, we can begin to anticipate
potential narratives that doubt key facts about mirror life,
its risks, and possible policy responses. For instance, we
anticipate some may dismiss the threat as science fiction or
impossible. In response, messengers should acknowledge
that mirror life does not yet exist while highlighting expert
judgments that its creation could become possible in the
coming years or decades. Other objections may focus on
advancing scientific achievement, delaying action until
mirror life emerges, stifling legitimate research, exaggerat-
ing risks, or arguments that mirror life must be created
to study countermeasures. Figure 7 provides examples of
these possible objections and helpful responses.
In addition to responding to good-faith counterargu-
ments regarding mirror life, it is important to address false
or inaccurate information, especially claims intended to
deceive the public. Such narratives may come from indi-
viduals who oppose policy proposals to address the threat
from mirror life or from adversaries seeking to exploit
uncertainty around the issue. Figure 8 summarizes pos-
sible narratives and helpful responses.
Finally, anticipating and addressing objections, misper-
ceptions, and inaccuracies in an effective and timely manner
requires the capacity to quickly conduct empirical research
that examines the current information environment,
increases understanding of how the public (or other com-
munication recipients) interprets new information, and tests
alternative communication approaches. Such research is best
accomplished with pre-positioned research infrastructure
(Parker, 2022; Parker et al., 2020) designed to anticipate and
facilitate rapid deployment of targeted studies, rather than
requiring entirely new research efforts each time.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
22
FIGURE 7
Possible Objections to Mirror Life Information and Example Responses
Mirror life is science
fiction—it doesnʼt exist.
Scientists generally agree that mirror life could be created within the
next few years to decades. There are reasons to think that its creation
could be catastrophic for most life on Earth.
Objection:Disbelief
Response:
Mirror life sounds
cool—we shouldnʼt limit
research on it. We cannot create the risk just to study mirror life or prove that we can
achieve it. It would be extremely difficult or even impossible to study
mirror life safely and securely.
Researching mirror life could be catastrophic to society. Once
created, we might be unable to control or reverse its dangers.
Objection:Scientific
achievement
Response:
The risks should be
addressed later, when a
mirror cell is closer to
being realized.
By waiting until mirror cells are created, we would lose the most
effective defense: not creating them at all. We should keep certain
technical hurdles unsolved.
Objection:Delayed
response
Response:

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
23
Figure 7 —Continued
We already have regulations
that govern dangerous or
dual-use research. More
governance will harm
commercial interests
and/or legitimate and
beneficial scientific research. Oversight of dual-use research is an important—and
different—problem.
Dual-use research, while often legitimate, may pose
risks. Current policies, such as those for dual-use
research of concern (DURC), use case-by-case review
to weigh benefits against harms.
However, mirror life creation presents unique and
potentially unprecedented risks. If expert assessments
are correct, the risks of mirror life could far outweigh
any known benefits. Existing dual-use policies are not
suited for risks at this scale.
However, research into mirror biomolecules could have
legitimate uses unrelated to mirror life. There would
likely need to be red lines beyond which such research
could not cross, maintaining barriers to the creation of
mirror life.
Objection:Stifling
legitimate
research
Response:

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
24
Figure 7 —Continued
Risks from synthesized
mirror bacteria would be
minimal, as they cannot
consume the non-mirror
nutrients found outside
the lab. A functional mirror cell could be engineered to consume
abundant non-mirror nutrients, such as ordinary glucose.
Some nutrients in the environment have the same
shape as their mirror image, so mirror bacteria would be
able to eat them.
It is indeed likely that mirror bacteria could be created
that would not pose an immediate risk. However, a bad
actor could work around or remove safety measures.
This can pose a catastrophic and irreversible risk.
Objection:Exaggerated risk
Response:
We need mirror biology to
create countermeasures
in case others create
mirror life. There are research pathways available to create
countermeasures that do not require the creation of
mirror life.
By creating mirror life to develop countermeasures, we
would create the very threat that we would be trying to
prevent. Furthermore, many aspects of the threat
posed by mirror life would not be addressed.
Objection:Researching
countermeasures
Response:

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
25
FIGURE 8
Possible Inaccurate Narratives About Mirror Life and Example Responses
The United States sees
military applications of
mirror life and wants to
weaponize it before its
adversaries do. The United States is party to the Biological Weapons Convention
and has categorically renounced the development or use of
biological weapons.
Furthermore, mirror life would be a self-defeating weapon. It
could not be controlled, and any attempt to use it would almost
certainly destroy the attacker as well.
Objection:Weaponization
of mirror life
Response:
The United States
sees commercial
utility in mirror life
and an advantage in
creating it before its
competitors do. Mirror life has been identified as an extreme
threat to all complex life on Earth.
Although there might be beneficial or
commercial uses for mirror biomolecules in the
future, the risks of assembling an entire mirror
organism are believed by experts to outweigh
any potential benefits.
Objection:Commercialization
and strategic
advantage of
creating mirror life
Response:

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
26
Given the Current Situation, What
Else Can Be Done?
The public conversation about the risks of mirror life will
likely continue as synthetic biology advances, increasing
both technical understanding and progress toward creating
mirror life. At the same time, research on the possible risks
and proposals for governance and mitigation will evolve.
Communication guidelines presented in this paper can
help policymakers understand how risk perceptions may
develop and inform the demands of risk communication.
Evolving scientific, political, and geopolitical dynam-
ics will shape public perceptions of mirror life risks and,
in turn, influence risk communication strategies. Break-
through scientific discoveries may generate public excite-
ment over potential benefits, while laboratory accidents,
disease outbreaks, or other hazards could heighten con-
cerns or fears. Perceived competition from adversaries
seeking to be first in creating mirror life could further sway
public support for mitigation policies. Communicators
must monitor these shifting dynamics and adapt messag-
ing to align with changes in public awareness and senti-
ment regarding risk management.
Building on the lessons in this paper, we recommend
that policymakers take the following steps now to ensure
that a communications strategy draws from reliable, com-
plete, and trusted information.
1.
 Es
tablish a baseline understanding of the public’s
perceptions of mirror life and attitudes toward
mitigation measures. Such research will help
policy
 ma
kers understand how views are chang-
ing and support testing of risk communication
messages.
2.
 Id
entify the types of information policymakers
and the public need to understand mirror life and
weigh the advantages and disadvantages of miti-
gation measures. This advance work can help mes-
sengers prepare a risk communication strategy and
materials. Messengers should aim to understand
common misconceptions about mirror life and how
they influence risk perceptions and support for
mitigations.
3.
 Id
entify potential risk communicators and pro-
vide them with the tools for effective risk com-
munication. This approach includes understanding
how stakeholders make sense of new risks and how
they use this understanding to make decisions. It
also includes strategies for engaging target audi-
ences in two-way communication rather than
simply falling back on one-way educational efforts.
4.
 Pr
epare contingencies that might affect views on
mirror organisms by using this information to
develop and test communications. Testing should
involve potential audiences to ensure that such mes-
saging is comprehensible and meets their informa-
tion needs.
Research on risk perceptions and communication
highlights policymakers’ crucial role in informing the
public about potential risks and fostering informed discus -
sions on risk management. While the risks from mirror
life may seem unimaginable to many today, following
these foundational steps can help policymakers clearly
explain such risks, increasing the likelihood of effective
risk mitigation.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
27
Notes
1 According to unpublished 2024 research conducted by RAND
researchers Henry H. Willis, Anu Narayanan, Benjamin Boudreaux,
Bianca Espinosa, Edward Geist, Daniel M. Gerstein, Dahlia Anne
Goldfeld, Nidhi Kalra, Tom LaTourrette, Emily Lathrop, Alvin Moon,
Jan Osburg, Benjamin Lee Preston, Kristin Van Abel, Emmi Yonekura,
Robert J. Lempert, Sunny D. Bhatt, Chandra Garber, and Emily Lawson.
2 According to unpublished 2024 research conducted by Willis and
colleagues.
3 According to unpublished 2024 research conducted by Willis and
colleagues.
References
Adamala, Katarzyna P., Deepa Agashe, Yasmine Belkaid, Daniela
Matias de C. Bittencourt, Yizhi Cai, Mattew W. Chang, Irene A.
Chen, George M. Church, Vaughn S. Cooper, Mark M. Davis, et al.,
“Confronting Risks of Mirror Life,” Science , Vol. 386, No. 6728, 2024.
Adamala, Katarzyna P., Deepa Agashe, Damon J. Binder, Yizhi Cai,
Vaughn S. Cooper, Ryan K. Duncombe, Kevin M. Esvelt, John I. Glass,
Timothy W. Hand, Thomas V. Inglesby, et al., Technical Report on
Mirror Bacteria: Feasibility and Risks , Stanford Digital Repository,
December 2024.
Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response, “Dual Use
Research of Concern Oversight Policy Framework,” webpage, undated.
As of September 30, 2025:
https://aspr.hhs.gov/S3/Pages/Dual-Use-Research-of-Concern-
Oversight-Policy-Framework.aspx
American Psychological Association, “8 Recommendations for
Countering Misinformation,” last updated March 1, 2024. As of
April 24, 2026:
https://www.apa.org/topics/journalism-facts/misinformation-
recommendations
Árvai, Joseph, “The End of Risk Communication as We Know It,”
Journal of Risk Research , Vol. 17, No. 10, 2014.
Balog‐Way, Dominic, Katherine McComas, and John Besley, “The
Evolving Field of Risk Communication,” Risk Analysis, Vol. 40, No. S1,
November 2020.
Bartolucci, A., M. C. Aquilino, L. Bril, J. Duncan, and T. van Steen,
“Effectiveness of Audience Segmentation in Instructional Risk
Communication: A Systematic Literature Review,” International Journal
of Disaster Risk Reduction , Vol. 95, September 2023.
Bateman, Jon, and Dean Jackson, Countering Disinformation Effectively:
An Evidence-Based Policy Guide , Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, 2024.
Bostrom, Anne, “Lead Is Like Mercury: Risk Comparisons, Analogies
and Mental Models,” in Asa Boholm, ed., New Perspectives on Risk
Communication: Uncertainty in a Complex Society , Routledge, 2011.
Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Katherine G. Carman, and Andrew M. Parker,
“Mental Associations with COVID-19 and How They Relate with Self-
Reported Protective Behaviors: A National Survey in the United States,”
Social Science & Medicine , Vol. 275, April 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
28
Budescu, David V., and Thomas S. Wallsten, “Processing Linguistic
Probabilities: General Principles and Empirical Evidence,” in Jerome
Busemeyer, Reid Hastie, and Douglas L. Medin, eds., Psychology of
Learning and Motivation , Vol. 32, Academic Press, 1995.
Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of
Environmental Modification Techniques, signed at Geneva, May 18, 1977.
Crichton, Michael, The Andromeda Strain , Alfred A. Knopf, 1969.
Crichton, Michael, Jurassic Park , Alfred A. Knopf, 1990.
Cuéllar, Mariano-Florentino (Tino), Corey Hinderstein, and David
Relman, “Prevention Beats Nonproliferation: Addressing the Risks
of Mirror Life,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,
October 3, 2025.
Drexler, K. Eric, Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery, Manufacturing,
and Computation , Wiley, 1992.
Edwards, Adrian, “Communicating Risks Through Analogies,” BMJ ,
Vol. 327, September 2003.
Epstein, Gerald L., Forrest W. Crawford, and Sella Nevo, Policy Options
to Prevent the Creation of Mirror Organisms , RAND Corporation,
PE-A3436-1, March 2025. As of October 1, 2025:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA3436-1.html
Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2024 FEMA Risk
Communications, Crisis Communications + Community Engagement
Summit Report , U.S. Department of Homeland Security, August 2024.
Fischhoff, Baruch, “Managing Risk Perceptions,” Issues in Science and
Technology, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1985.
Fischhoff, Baruch, “Risk Perception and Communication Unplugged:
Twenty Years of Process,” Risk Analysis , Vol. 15, No. 2, 1995.
Fischhoff, Baruch, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein, “Lay Foibles and
Expert Fables in Judgments About Risk,” American Statistician , Vol. 36,
No. 3b, 1982.
Fischhoff, Baruch, Noel T. Brewer, and Julie S. Downs, eds.,
Communicating Risks and Benefits: An Evidence-Based User’s Guide ,
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, August 2011.
Fredens, Julius, Kaihang Wang, Daniel de la Torre, Louise F. H. Funke,
Wesley E. Robertson, Yonka Christova, Tiongsun Chia, Wolfgang H.
Schmied, Daniel L. Dunkelmann, Václav Beránek, et al., “Total
Synthesis of Escherichia coli with a Recoded Genome,” Nature , Vol. 569,
May 2019.
Gentner, Dedre, and Keith J. Holyoak, “Reasoning and Learning by
Analogy: Introduction,” American Psychologist , Vol. 52, No. 1, 1997.
Harrison, Katriona, Angus S. Mackay, Lucas Kambanis, Joshua W. C.
Maxwell, and Richard J. Payne, “Synthesis and Applications of Mirror-
Image Proteins,” Nature Reviews Chemistry , Vol. 7, May 2023.
Helmus, Todd C., Liisa Hiatt, and Alejandro Uriel Becerra-Ornelas, Do
National Security Communication Campaigns Work? Taking a Lesson
from the Public Health Sector , RAND Corporation, RR-A766-1, 2022. As
of February 25, 2026:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA766-1.html
Hutchison, Clyde A., III, Ray-Yuan Chuang, Vladimir N. Noskov,
Nacyra Assad-Garcia, Thomas J. Deerinck, Mark H. Ellisman, John Gill,
Krishna Kannan, Bogumil J. Karas, Li Ma, et al., “Design and Synthesis
of a Minimal Bacterial Genome,” Science , Vol. 351, No. 6280, March
2016.
Institut Pasteur, “Mirror Life: Inside the Discussion,” July 22, 2025.
Kalra, Nidhi, Forrest W. Crawford, Matthew L. Nicotra, Scott Behmer,
Josh Dettman, Gerald L. Epstein, Edward Geist, David Glickstein,
Graham Griffin, and Krista Langeland, A U.S. Strategy to Prevent the
Creation of Mirror Life , RAND Corporation, RR-A4335-1, forthcoming.
Kousky, Carolyn, and Leonard Shabman, Understanding Flood Risk
Decision Making: Implications for Flood Risk Communication Program
Design, Resources for the Future, Discussion Paper 15-01, 2015.
Kubota, Taylor, “A New Report Warns of Serious Risks from ‘Mirror
Life,” Stanford Report , December 16, 2024.
Morgan, M. Granger, Baruch Fischhoff, Ann Bostrom, and Cynthia
Atman, Risk Communication: A Mental Models Approach , Cambridge
University Press, 2001.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, “Mirror
Image Biology: Pushing the Envelope in Designing Biological
Systems—A Workshop,” webpage, undated. As of December 1, 2025:
https://www.nationalacademies.org/projects/DELS-BLS-25-03
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Building
Communication Capacity to Counter Infectious Disease Threats:
Proceedings of a Workshop , National Academies Press, 2016.
National Institutes of Health, “Stop the Spread of Superbugs: Help Fight
Drug-Resistant Bacteria,” NIH News in Health , February 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
29
National Science Foundation, “Collaborative Research: Theoretical
and Experimental Investigations of Soft Colloidal Materials,” webpage,
award 1443228, July 31, 2014a. As of July 21, 2025:
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/
showAward?AWD_ID=1443228&HistoricalAwards=false
National Science Foundation, “ERASynBio: Establishment of a Fully
Synthetic, Mirror-Image Biological System,” webpage, award 1443228,
July 31, 2014b. As of July 21, 2025:
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/
showAward?AWD_ID=1443228&HistoricalAwards=false
National Science Foundation, “Collaborative Research: Booting Up
a Mirror Cell,” webpage, award EF-1935372, September 2019. As of
July 21, 2025:
https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/
showAward?A WD_ID=1935372&HistoricalAwards=false
NSF—See National Science Foundation.
Paris Conference on Risks from Mirror Life, Paris Conference on Risks
from Mirror Life: Meeting Report , September 2025.
Parker, Andrew M., “The Need to Invest in Social Science Infrastructure
to Address Emerging Crises,” in Aaron B. Frank and Elizabeth M.
Bartels, eds., Adaptive Engagement for Undergoverned Spaces: Concepts,
Challenges, and Prospects for New Approaches , RAND Corporation,
RR-A1275-1, 2022. As of April 24, 2026:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1275-1.html
Parker, Andrew M., Amanda F. Edelman, Katherine G. Carman, and
Melissa L. Finucane, “On the Need for Prospective Disaster Survey
Panels,” Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness , Vol. 14,
No. 3, June 2020.
Peplow, Mark, “How Should ‘Mirror Life’ Research Be Restricted?
Debate Heats Up,” Nature, September 15, 2025.
Pidgeon, Nick, “Engaging Publics About Environmental and
Technology Risks: Frames, Values and Deliberation,” Journal of Risk
Research, Vol. 24, No. 1, January 2021.
Schearer, Victoria, Chen-Hsu Yu, Xuan Han, and Jonathan T.
Sczepanski, “The Clinical Potential of L-Oligonucleotides: Challenges
and Opportunities,” Chemical Science , Vol. 15, 2024.
Service, Robert F., “Leading Scientists Warn Against Developing
‘Mirror-Image’ Bacteria,” Science Insider , December 12, 2024.
Siegrist, Michael, “Trust and Risk Perception: A Critical Review of the
Literature,” Risk Analysis , Vol. 41, No. 3, March 2021.
Slovic, Paul, “Perception of Risk,” Science , Vol. 236, No. 4799, 1987.
Slovic, Paul, “Risk Perception and Risk Analysis in a Hyperpartisan and
Virtuously Violent World,” Risk Analysis , Vol. 40, No. S1, 2020.
The Spirit of Asilomar and the Future of Biotechnology Summit, “Spirit
of Asilomar Entreaty 2025.4.4: Risks from Mirror Life,” Rice University,
February 2025.
Steratore, Rachel, Aaron Clark-Ginsberg, Shoshana R. Shelton,
Nipher Malika, Kristin J. Leuschner, and Tucker Reese, Community
and Individual Disaster Resilience for Floods: Options for Improving
Protective Action Guidance , Homeland Security Operational Analysis
Center operated by the RAND Corporation, RR-A1770-1, 2023. As of
December 12, 2025:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA1770-1.html
UK Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, “Ozone
Depletion and Climate Change,” webpage, undated. As of September 29,
2025:
https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/research/ozone-uv/
moreinfo?view=deleption-climate-change
UK Government Office for Science, “Research and Analysis: Mirror
Life,” July 16, 2025. As of December 1, 2025:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mirror-life/mirror-life
University of Manchester, “Manchester Workshop Advances Technical
Understanding of Mirror Organism Precursor Technologies,”
October 27, 2025. As of May 11, 2026:
https://www.manchester.ac.uk/about/news/manchester-workshop-
advances-technical-understanding-of-mirror-organism-precursor-
technologies/
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “About Prion
Diseases,” webpage, undated. As of September 29, 2025:
https://www.cdc.gov/prions/about/index.html
U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Invasive Species Information
Center, “What Are Invasive Species?” webpage, undated. As of
September 29, 2025:
https://www.invasivespeciesinfo.gov/what-are-invasive-species
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, “Risk Messaging Guidance,” last
updated July 10, 2025. As of April 24, 2026:
https://www.epa.gov/risk/risk-messaging-guidance
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, “Agricultural Biotechnology,”
webpage, undated. As of March 9, 2026:
https://www.fda.gov/food/consumers/agricultural-biotechnology

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
30
Vonnegut, Kurt, Jr., Cat’s Cradle , Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1963.
Wachinger, Gisela, Ortwin Renn, Chloe Begg, and Christian Kuhlicke,
“The Risk Perception Paradox—Implications for Governance and
Communication of Natural Hazards,” Risk Analysis , Vol. 33, No. 6, 2013.
Wallsten, Thomas S., David V. Budescu, Rami Zwick, and Steven M.
Kemp, “Preferences and Reasons for Communicating Probabilistic
Information in Verbal or Numerical Terms,” Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society, Vol. 31, No. 2, 1993.
Warren, George W., and Sarah M. Duckett, “Risk Perception and
Communication, Plugged‐In: Fifty Years of Process,” Risk Analysis ,
Vol. 46, No. 3, 2026.
Zentrale Kommission f
ür di
e Biologische Sicherheit, “Spiegelbakterien,”
September 22, 2025. As of December 1, 2025:
https://zkbs-online.de/synthetische-biologie/spiegelbakterien#

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
31
About the Authors
Andrew M. Parker is a senior behavioral and social scientist at RAND and a professor
of policy analysis at the RAND School of Public Policy. His research applies core con-
cepts in behavioral decision research to the understanding of decisionmakers’ behavior
in complex, real-world situations, including in health and emergency preparedness. He
holds a Ph.D. in behavioral decision theory.
Forrest W. Crawford is a senior statistician at RAND. He conducts technical and
policy research on emerging technology and biosecurity. Crawford holds a Ph.D. in
biomathematics.
Gerald L. Epstein is an adjunct senior physical scientist at RAND and has spent more
than 40 years inside and outside government researching, analyzing, formulating, and
communicating public policy at the intersection of science, technology, and security. He
works with the Center for AI, Security, and Technology on the governance of biotech-
nology and the life sciences. He holds a Ph.D. in physics.
Sella Nevo is a senior information scientist at RAND and the director of the Center for
AI, Security, and Technology. He conducts technical and policy research on biosecurity
and AI security. Nevo holds a dual B.S. degree in computer science and mathematics.
David Glickstein is a research communications analyst at RAND. He holds a Master of
Public Policy with a concentration in science and technology policy.
Matthew L. Nicotra is a senior physical scientist at RAND. His research focuses on
biosecurity, emerging biotechnology risks, and the intersection of life sciences with
national security. Nicotra holds a Ph.D. in ecology and evolutionary biology.
Henry H. Willis is a senior policy researcher at RAND and the associate director of the
Center for AI, Security, and Technology. His recent work analyzed biosecurity risks and
biodefense capabilities, emerging and existential risks, climate and natural disaster risks,
critical infrastructure resilience, and national preparedness to chemical, biological, radio-
logical, and nuclear attacks. He holds a Ph.D. in engineering and public policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
www.rand.org
PE-A4619-1
About This Paper
Mirror life is an alternate form of life in which every molecule is replaced
with its mirror image. Recently, a group of scientists warned that mirror
life, if created and released, could have devastating consequences
for humans, plants, and animals, potentially leading to human extinc-
tion. Mirror life does not exist yet, but research programs have made
progress in synthesizing mirrored biomolecules, which is an essential
step toward creating mirror life, and scientists believe that a living mirror
bacterium could be created within a few decades. As scientists and
policymakers consider policy options to address the risks from mirror
life, they face challenges in communicating these risks to the public,
businesses, researchers, and government agencies that could be
tasked with implementing policies to respond to the threat.
In this paper, we provide recommended communication strategies
for explaining mirror life, its risks, and the policies that government
decision
 ma
kers might choose to employ to guard against those risks.
We provide recommended language for describing the science of mirror
life; describe the potential strengths and pitfalls of drawing analogies to
other kinds of threats in communications; and offer ways of addressing
confusion and concerns about mirror life, research into mirror life, and
governance proposals. Our recommendations are based on technical
findings about the risks of mirror life and research on effective risk com-
munication about threats to public health, safety, and security.
Center on AI, Security, and Technology
RAND Global and Emerging Risks is a division of RAND that delivers
rigorous and objective public policy research on the most consequential
challenges to civilization and global security. This work was undertaken
by the division’s Center on AI, Security, and Technology, which aims
to examine the opportunities and risks of rapid technological change,
focusing on artificial intelligence, security, and biotechnology. For more
information, contact cast@rand.org.
Funding
This effort was independently initiated and conducted within the Center
on AI, Security, and Technology using income from operations and gifts
and grants from philanthropic supporters. A complete list of donors and
funders is available at www.rand.org/CAST. RAND clients, donors, and
grantors have no influence over research findings or recommendations.
RAND is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world safer and
more secure, healthier and more prosperous. RAND is nonprofit, nonpartisan, and committed to the public interest.
Research Integrity
Our mission to help improve policy and decisionmaking through research and analysis is enabled through our core values of quality and
objectivity and our unwavering commitment to the highest level of integrity and ethical behavior. To help ensure our research and analysis
are rigorous, objective, and nonpartisan, we subject our research publications to a robust and exacting quality-assurance process; avoid
both the appearance and reality of financial and other conflicts of interest through staff training, project screening, and a policy of mandatory
disclosure; and pursue transparency in our research engagements through our commitment to the open publication of our research findings
and recommendations, disclosure of the source of funding of published research, and policies to ensure intellectual independence. For more
information, visit www.rand.org/about/research-integrity.
RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
 is a registered trademark.
Limited Print and Electronic Distribution Rights
This publication and trademark(s) contained herein are protected by law. This representation of RAND intellectual property is provided for
noncommercial use only. Unauthorized posting of this publication online is prohibited; linking directly to its webpage on rand.org is encouraged.
Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse in another form, any of its research products for commercial purposes. For
information on reprint and reuse permissions, please visit www.rand.org/about/publishing/permissions.
For more information on this publication, visit www.rand.org/t/PEA4619-1.
© 2026 RAND Corporation
