
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
STEVEN F. COMER, HUNTER PAVELA, VARUN GANDHI, KYLE SILER-EVANS, ERICH DEVENDORF,
BEN KELLEY, JAMES GIMBI, JAIR AGUIRRE, GABRIEL KULP, MARK STALCZYNSKI,
MATTHEW J. MALONE
Secure Inference
Data Centers
A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
Research Report

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
For more information on this publication, visit www.rand.org/t/RRA4827-1 .
About RAND
RAND is a research organization that develops solutions to public policy challenges to help make communities throughout the world
safer and more secure, healthier and more prosperous. RAND is nonprofit, nonpartisan, and committed to the public interest. To learn
more about RAND, visit www.rand.org.
Research Integrity
Our research integrity is grounded in RAND’s core values of quality and objectivity. Rigorous quality assurance procedures,
conflict of interest screening, and transparency in funding ensure that every study is objective and nonpartisan. Learn more at
www.rand.org/integrity.
RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
Published by the RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, Calif.
© 2026 RAND Corporation
 is a registered trademark.
Limited Print and Electronic Distribution Rights
This publication and trademark(s) contained herein are protected by law. This representation of RAND intellectual property is
provided for noncommercial use only. Unauthorized posting of this publication online is prohibited; linking directly to its webpage
on rand.org is encouraged. Permission is required from RAND to reproduce, or reuse in another form, any of its research products for
commercial purposes. For information on reprint and reuse permissions, visit www.rand.org/about/publishing/permissions.
RR-A4827-1

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
iii
About This Report
This report presents a security strategy to protect artificial intelligence (AI) data centers from the most
sophisticated and determined nation-state adversaries. We examine a secure inference data center designed
to securely deploy trained models. We present a conceptual security architecture and a methodology for
securely implementing features, and we recommend actions to accelerate deployment. The work builds on
RAND’s prior research on AI security and is intended to inform AI laboratories, cloud providers, and gov -
ernment stakeholders who may need to protect strategically important AI deployments or reduce the risk
posed by dangerous AI systems.
Center on AI, Security, and Technology
RAND Global and Emerging Risks is a division of RAND that delivers rigorous and objective public policy
research on the most consequential challenges to civilization and global security. This work was undertaken
by the division’s Center on AI, Security, and Technology, which aims to examine the opportunities and risks
of rapid technological change, focusing on artificial intelligence, security, and biotechnology. For more infor-
mation, contact cast@rand.org.
Funding
This research was independently initiated and conducted within the Center on AI, Security, and Technology
using income from operations and gifts and grants from philanthropic supporters. A complete list of donors
and funders is available at www.rand.org/CAST. RAND clients, donors, and grantors have no influence over
research findings or recommendations.
Acknowledgments
We thank the following experts, as well as those who did not opt to be named, for their insights and contribu-
tions to the ideas in this report: William Young, Orr Dermer, Alvin Moon, Andrew Smith, and Sella Nevo.
We are grateful to our peer reviewers, Alex Larson at Dragos and Elizabeth Bodine-Baron at RAND, for
their insightful and thoughtful comments and critique of the report.
Not all consulted experts or reviewers support all recommendations and conclusions in the report, and
the views expressed in this report do not necessarily represent the views of any institution or organization
with which the consulted participants are affiliated, including the U.S. government. The authors are solely
responsible for any errors or omissions.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
v
Summary
As frontier artificial intelligence (AI) systems continue to advance, the impact of model theft, manipulation,
and misuse increases. Some future AI deployments will require substantially stronger security than ordinary
commercial cloud environments can provide. This report presents a security strategy for a secure inference
data center (SIDC): a purpose-built, Security Level 5 (SL5) facility for operating trained AI models in high-
risk settings in which confidentiality and integrity are paramount.
The SIDC strategy is designed for cases in which protected assets must be defended against highly capable
nation-state adversaries. We assess with high confidence that an SIDC built in accordance with our security
strategy can preserve the confidentiality and integrity of model weights, algorithms, and inference data over
a five-year operational period.
An SIDC can be implemented today using proven, off-the-shelf compute hardware: No fundamental
research breakthroughs are required. The security strategy and system design are also agnostic to the model
serving inference and to the hardware stack on which it runs. We estimate a cost of $37 million to $50 mil -
lion for a proof-of-concept facility and $277 million to $345 million for a larger, enterprise-scale version. We
predict that construction and deployment activities can be completed rapidly, in as few as 14 months.
This report is focused on conceptual analysis of the SIDC, omitting sensitive research and products on
specific operational, architectural, and technical details.
Use Cases
Highly secure inference data centers can be useful for a variety of purposes and relevant in a variety of sce -
narios, such as the following:
• SI
DCs can secure commercial AI systems (that have been trained in nonsecure facilities) that are being
deployed in sensitive national security settings, protecting both the confidentiality of classified pay -
loads and the integrity of the critical national security system that the AI system is incorporated into.
• SI
DCs can act as emergency (temporary or long-term) hosting facilities in case strategically important
or dangerous capabilities emerge (e.g., in biotechnology) or if a nation-state adversary embarks on a
campaign to undermine or compromise U.S. AI systems. Such data centers would provide the (poten -
tially urgent) ability to use the system without unacceptable risk to its confidentiality or integrity.
•
 Pr
ototyping and building inference SIDC-style data centers (which can be far smaller, simpler, and
cheaper than the smallest useful training data center) can act as a critical stepping stone and testing
ground for developing the capability to construct full highly secure training data centers.
Note that none of the motivations above requires applying this high-security standard to all inference
data centers or to commercial data centers providing global-scale services. To ground the discussion and
examples in this report, we focus on the first use case described above: deploying commercial AI systems
within sensitive national security environments.
Security Approach
The SIDC security strategy follows a concept-to-circuit approach: Security-critical design choices are derived
from the strategic outcomes the system must prevent, rather than being added later as controls around general-

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
vi
purpose infrastructure. We begin with the losses that would be unacceptable (such as theft of model weights
or compromise of inference data) and use Systems-Theoretic Process Analysis for Security (STPA-Sec) to
identify the constraints needed to prevent them.
Those constraints are then translated into concrete requirements, architectures, components, and imple -
mentation mechanisms, with traceability from strategic objective to circuit-level design. This approach favors
minimal, purpose-built features because excess capacity introduces unnecessary risk. For the most security-
critical elements, the SIDC strategy requires high trustworthiness, including formal methods and other rig -
orous assurance techniques, to demonstrate that components satisfy their required security properties.
Next Steps
Key early steps to deploying an SIDC include the following:
• Id
entify an implementing entity and begin detailed engineering. An AI laboratory, cloud provider,
U.S. government agency, or public-interest organization should step forward, engage a system integra -
tor, and initiate detailed design.
• Se
lect a site early. Because major construction phases are largely sequential, early site selection is criti -
cal to minimizing the total project duration. For rapid deployment, housing the SIDC within an exist -
ing government facility, e.g., in an aircraft hangar, can bypass or significantly shorten key development
steps.
•
 Pr
ototype key security features and integration now. Critical security components, including for -
mally verified protocols and unidirectional dataflows, can be tested on short timescales, independent
of facility construction. Doing so is a low-cost opportunity to reduce technical risk and prevent down -
stream delays.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
vii
Contents
About This Report .......................................................................................................... iii
Summary ...................................................................................................................... v
Figures and Tables .......................................................................................................... ix
CHAPTER 1
Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1
Security Objective .......................................................................................................... 1
Scope ......................................................................................................................... 2
Limitations .................................................................................................................. 3
Organization of This Report ............................................................................................. 3
CHAPTER 2
Approach ...................................................................................................................... 5
System-Theoretic Process Analysis for Security ....................................................................... 5
Time and Cost Estimates .................................................................................................. 6
CHAPTER 3
Security Strategy ............................................................................................................. 9
Threat Model and Security Objective ................................................................................... 9
System Design ............................................................................................................. 10
Security Guarantees ...................................................................................................... 10
Operational Limitations .................................................................................................. 14
CHAPTER 4
Concept to Circuit .......................................................................................................... 17
Example: Cross-Realm Solution ........................................................................................ 17
Assurance Path for the CRS ............................................................................................. 18
Trustworthiness and Formal Methods ................................................................................. 19
Concept-to-Circuit Methodology ....................................................................................... 20
Next Steps .................................................................................................................. 22
CHAPTER 5
Conclusions and Recommendations ..................................................................................... 23
Effective Security Requires Purpose-Built, Security-First Facilities ............................................... 23
Such Security Is Appropriate for Only Targeted Use Cases ......................................................... 23
Recommended Next Steps ............................................................................................... 24
Conclusion ................................................................................................................. 24
APPENDIXES
A. STPA-Sec Outputs ....................................................................................................... 25
B. Time and Cost to Implement an SIDC ............................................................................... 27
C. Concept-to-Circuit Tools and Methods ............................................................................. 33
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ 37
References .................................................................................................................... 39
About the Authors .......................................................................................................... 41

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
ix
Figures and Tables
Figures
 3.1. Conceptual Diagram of the SIDC ........................................................................... 13
 4.
1. Co
ncept-to-Circuit Path ...................................................................................... 21
 B.
1. Ti
meline to Implement the SIDC, Normal Pace and Accelerated Pace ................................ 29
Tables
 2.1. Example STPA-Sec Outputs ................................................................................... 6
 4.
1. As
surance Chain Summary .................................................................................. 19
 A.
1. ST
PA-Sec Outputs for the SIDC ............................................................................. 25
 B.
1. Co
st Estimates for Proof-of-Concept and Deployment-Scale SIDCs ................................... 28

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
As artificial intelligence (AI) models become strategically important to protect, highly secure data centers
will be critical for ensuring that U.S.-developed frontier models remain protected from theft, sabotage, and
misuse by sophisticated and well-resourced attackers. The need for such facilities could arise quickly, and
preparation lead times may be short, making it critical to plan and build capacity now.
This report aims to advance the state of the art for secure inference data centers (SIDCs). Specifically, the
report provides
•
 a hi
gh-level system architecture for an SIDC
• a ve
rtically integrated security strategy, from national security objectives to technical controls
• a c
oncept-to-circuit methodology for adding critical features without undermining the security effec -
tiveness
• a wo
rked example of a cross-realm communication mechanism
• co
st, schedule, and implementation recommendations.
This report extends the foundational research from the prior RAND reports Securing AI Model Weights
and Securing AI Algorithmic Insights .1 While those previous works identified attack vectors and defined
security levels, a significant gap remains in translating those security levels into implementable security
strategies. This work addresses that gap by providing a conceptual security architecture and procedures to
effectively translate from concept to circuit-level implementation.
2
Security Objective
A key aim of this work is to define security strategies capable of defending AI infrastructure against Opera -
tional Capacity 5 (OC5) attacks, the most sophisticated threat category identified in previous research. 3 OC5
operations are defined as
[o]perations roughly less capable than or comparable to 1,000 individuals who have experience and exper-
tise years ahead of the (public) state of the art in a variety of relevant professions (cybersecurity, human
1 Sella Nevo, Dan Lahav, Ajay Karpur, Yogev Bar-On, Henry Alexander Bradley, and Jeff Alstott, Securing AI Model Weights:
Preventing Theft and Misuse of Frontier Models , RAND Corporation, RR-A2849-1, 2024; Asher Brass-Gershovich, Rachel
Steratore, Wesley Hurd, Henry Alexander Bradley, Anjay Friedman, and Sella Nevo, Securing AI Algorithmic Insights , RAND
Corporation, RR-A4685-1, 2026.
2 Nevo et al., 2024.
3 This work targets the same threat level as Security Level 5 (SL5) defined in the report by Nevo et al. (2024)—protection
against OC5 adversaries—and shares substantial overlap in security approach. However, because the designs presented in this
report were not constrained by the specific measures in that framework, we do not use the SL5 designation.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
2
intelligence gathering, physical operations, etc.) spending years with a total budget of up to $1 billion on
the specific operation, with state-level infrastructure and access developed over decades and access to state
resources such as legal cover, interception of communication infrastructure, and more.
4
The security objective prioritizes the confidentiality and integrity of model weights, algorithms, the input
and output tokens of the model, and other components critical to AI data center operations. Defending
against an OC5 actor is an extremely high bar, exceeding established security practices for commercial and
sensitive computing environments. Meeting this standard requires a combination of stringent security mea -
sures and significant operational constraints.
To state our security claim directly, we believe that an SIDC implemented and operated according to
the concepts, specifications, and designs described in this report can withstand OC5 attacks for a five-year
operational period without experiencing the unacceptable losses we aim to prevent.
5 This claim is specific to
the OC5 threat model and to the system’s stated security objective: preserving confidentiality and integrity,
even when doing so requires sacrificing availability.
Scope
SIDCs are compact facilities designed to securely deploy already trained models. The focus of this report is
a technical analysis to develop security engineering strategies that can credibly achieve the stated security
objectives. We do not specify the thresholds at which such security is warranted, how to balance security with
other objectives, or policy mechanisms to achieve data center security (e.g., regulation, incentives, public-
private partnerships). Further details about the size, time, and cost of our representative data center are pro -
vided in Appendix B.
The SIDC considered in this report is intended for scenarios in which the risks of compromise are excep-
tionally grave and warrant extreme security. Our primary focus is a representative national security appli -
cation. As AI systems increasingly support the analysis of sensitive intelligence and inform critical national
security decisions, high-assurance AI infrastructure becomes essential. These systems are likely to be excep -
tionally high-value targets for nation-state adversaries: A single facility could contain highly capable AI
models (representing billions of dollars in research and development investment), multiple streams of classi-
fied information, and the potential to manipulate strategic government decisionmaking.
The SIDC strategy presented here provides high-assurance security to prevent OC5 adversaries from
manipulating model inputs or outputs to covertly influence decisionmaking or exfiltrating model weights
and classified data.
While we employ the national security use case as a concrete example, we emphasize that the approach
and resulting insights presented in this report should be viewed more broadly. A similar approach could be
used to implement SIDC facilities to provide emergency response capacity if high-security requirements arise
rapidly—for example, as a result of dangerous emerging capabilities (e.g., biological weapon design) or coor-
dinated attacks on AI infrastructure. In addition, a small-scale SIDC facility could serve as a pilot project to
derisk investment in larger secure data centers.
Readers should treat the security strategy presented here as an illustrative example of what it takes to
accomplish OC5-level protection generally. Relevant stakeholders are encouraged to use the approach and
4 Nevo et al., 2024, p. 10.
5 Although we expect the SIDC to hold security value beyond five years, the ability to withstand long-duration OC5 cam -
paigns becomes less robust the longer the facility remains in operation.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Introduction
3
principles illustrated in this report to implement purpose-built security for their unique use cases, opera -
tional constraints, and security requirements.
Limitations
We note several important limitations that should inform how readers interpret and apply these findings.
First, the analysis is primarily conceptual rather than operational. This report does not include architectural
blueprints, detailed technical implementations, or step-by-step deployment procedures. These are omitted
not because we think that these details should be immune from scrutiny. On the contrary, they require
robust verification. Those evaluations must occur privately with relevant stakeholders, not in a public report
that hands attackers a precise map of the technical controls employed to secure the SIDC. Interested parties
should engage with RAND to obtain additional specifications.
The cost and schedule estimates contained in Appendix B are derived from conceptual designs and are
inherently imprecise; they should be regarded as order-of-magnitude estimates suitable for strategic plan -
ning, not as procurement-ready budgets.
Finally, no absolute method or benchmark exists for establishing sufficient security against the most-
sophisticated adversaries. Although we use structured methods and rely on expertise within and external to
the project team, no collection of security controls can provide an absolute guarantee of successful defense
against an OC5 attack, and no security claims can hold for an indefinite period of time.
Organization of This Report
This report is organized as follows: Chapter 2 briefly describes the analytical methods, including the secu -
rity design approach and the basis for the time and cost estimates. Chapter 3 details the security strategy.
Chapter 4 shows the strategy continuity from concept down to the circuit level. Chapter 5 concludes with
key findings and recommended next steps for AI laboratories, cloud providers, and government stakeholders
who may need to secure strategically important AI capabilities.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
5
CHAPTER 2
Approach
This chapter describes our approach to (1) developing security strategies capable of defending against the
most-sophisticated and most-determined nation-state adversaries and (2) estimating the time and cost to
implement the envisioned facilities. The methods for each are summarized below.
System-Theoretic Process Analysis for Security
To develop a security strategy capable of resisting OC5-level threats, we employed System-Theoretic Process
Analysis for Security (STPA-Sec), a top-down methodology rooted in systems engineering that treats secu -
rity as a fundamental control problem.
1 Rather than layering a collection of security features onto existing
architectures, STPA-Sec seeks to develop a concept of secure function by modeling a holistic system. In our
case, this means a data center serving sensitive AI operations. Security is treated as an emergent property of
the whole system, including humans and the ways they control, operate, and interact with it, rather than a
feature of any individual component.
The process begins by asking: What are the goals of the system, and which losses are unacceptable? The
methodology then works systematically through hazards (system states that can lead to losses), constraints
(conditions that prevent those hazards), and controls (mechanisms that enforce those constraints). Examples
of these outputs are shown in Table 2.1, and the full set of goals, losses, and hazards is provided in Appen -
dix A. The STPA-Sec structure creates explicit traceability from each security control back to the unaccept -
able losses that it prevents.
2 Stakeholders can evaluate any proposed control by weighing its cost or opera -
tional impact against the specific losses that it is designed to prevent.
Our engineering effort adopted a security-first posture: When design choices created tension between
security and other considerations, such as system availability, operational convenience, or cost, we consis -
tently prioritized security. The resulting security strategy is intended to withstand OC5-level attacks with
high confidence. As noted in Chapter 1, readers should view the resulting security strategy as an illustrative
example, and relevant stakeholders are encouraged to use the approach and principles illustrated here to
implement purpose-built security for their unique use cases, operational constraints, and security require -
ments. The same structure supports systematic verification, red-team evaluation organized around the
hazard-constraint framework, and audits that test the efficacy of deployed controls.
1 SAE International, “Standard J3307_202503: System Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA) Standard for All Industries,”
March 24, 2025; William Young and Nancy G. Leveson, “An Integrated Approach to Safety and Security Based on Systems
Theory,” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 57, No. 2, February 2014.
2 In many cases, controls will have a one-to-many mapping to constraints, hazards, and losses.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
6
Complementing STPA-Sec, we draw on important concepts from National Institute of Standards and
Technology’s (NIST’s) Engineering Trustworthy Secure Systems. 3 We use the Security Design Order of Pre -
cedence (SecDOP), which establishes engineering design priorities for eliminating hazards. The SecDOP
guided our emphasis on minimizing and eliminating unnecessary features. As Chapters 3 and 4 will show,
we approach secure data centers as purpose-built facilities. Functions not essential to the system goals are
excluded rather than merely controlled.
We use the principle that rigorous secure systems engineering must address three distinct contexts: prob-
lem, solution, and trustworthiness. This led us to invest substantially more effort in the problem and trust -
worthiness contexts than is typical. STPA-Sec enables us to address the problem context, traditional systems
engineering addresses the solution context, and we generally specify “high” levels of trustworthiness for the
solution at critical points. In this context, high trustworthiness generally translates to heavy use of formal
methods to prove that a system or component possesses certain desirable properties.
The security strategy for the SIDC (Chapter 3) is built around five system goals, five unacceptable losses,
and 11 primary hazards (detailed in Appendix A).
Time and Cost Estimates
To estimate the cost required to construct secure data centers, we primarily used estimation by analogy,
comparing data center costs on a dollar-per-megawatt or dollar-per-square-foot basis using publicly avail -
able data from recent projects and industry benchmarks. This top-down approach is well suited to estimat -
ing projects that are in the conceptual phase, for which detailed design information is unavailable.
4 In select
cases, we used bottom-up estimating to cross-check results and provide additional precision on specific secu-
rity controls. Compute hardware was estimated separately from facility construction because hardware can
represent more than half of the total project costs.
5
The cost estimates in this report should be interpreted as order-of-magnitude estimates suitable for stra -
tegic planning, not detailed procurement budgets. Actual costs will vary substantially based on site selection,
final design, market conditions, and other project-specific factors.
3 Ron Ross, Mark Winstead, and Michael McEvilley, Engineering Trustworthy Secure Systems , National Institute of Stan -
dards and Technology, NIST SP 800-160v1r1, November 2022.
4 Warfighting Acquisition University, “Cost Estimation Methods,” webpage, undated; Christine Green, “Estimating as an
Art—What It Takes to Make Good Art,” paper presented at PMI Global Congress 2006, Madrid, Spain, October 2006.
5 Didier Vila, “Deconstructing the Data Center: A Look at the Cost Structure Igniting the AI Boom!” Alpha Matica, undated.
TABLE 2.1
Example STPA-Sec Outputs
Element Example
System goals Maintain international lead in AI.
Unacceptable losses Confidentiality of model weights is lost.
Hazards SIDC allows unauthorized information transaction across realm boundary.
System constraints Channel controller prevents unauthorized information transactions across realm boundary.
Security controls Formally verified field-programmable gate array (FPGA) implements specified state
machine and guarantees only specified behavior.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Approach
7
For time estimates, we drew on historical data from recent projects and industry planning estimates to
establish typical development timelines across all major phases: land acquisition, design and engineering,
permitting, construction, and commissioning. We then assessed whether specialized security requirements
would extend critical path activities or could be done in parallel with standard development steps. Finally, we
considered how timelines might be compressed under emergency conditions, in which building the secure
data center becomes a top national priority.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
9
CHAPTER 3
Security Strategy
This chapter presents our minimum viable concept for an SIDC, which serves as a foundation for protected
AI inference deployments in security-sensitive environments. The chapter aims to build familiarity with the
secure base architecture and critical security guarantees.
We define the security objectives and threat model, explain the core design principles and high-level
security architecture, and enumerate operational limitations. In the subsequent chapter, we share a concept-
to-circuit example and provide a methodology by which users can add features to the SIDC without compro-
mising security.
Threat Model and Security Objective
The SIDC facility described in this chapter is designed for a representative national security deployment
in which AI models are used to inform strategic planning and decisionmaking. We assume a persistent
adversary with OC5-level capabilities: that is to say, a well-funded, state-backed adversary with deep tech -
nical expertise, access to sovereign infrastructure and authorities, and the capacity to sustain a dedicated,
multi
 ye
ar campaign against a single target. This encompasses sophisticated cyber, supply chain, and physical
attacks against data center infrastructure and personnel. 1
Under this threat model and with our selected objectives, any compromise of the protected informa -
tion and system properties is considered unacceptable. Accordingly, the SIDC prioritizes confidentiality and
integrity over availability. Because the system is highly isolated and minimally featured, we expect such out -
ages to be rare, but the system includes a fail-safe state where features are temporarily disabled in circum -
stances in which protected information would otherwise be disclosed or corrupted. The system operates in
this state while investigation and recovery procedures occur. Regarding those elements of protected informa-
tion, the SIDC must ensure confidentiality and integrity for
•
 co
pies of model weights, inference algorithms, and reference data that exist inside the SIDC
• in
ference prompts and responses as and while they exist inside the SIDC.
Furthermore, the SIDC makes the following additional security claims:
• Eac
h inference response is verifiable, given valid model weights, model architecture, and the retrieved
context from reference data storage.
• Co
mpromise of any single subsystem or person does not enable other activity that violates these protec-
tion objectives.
1 See Nevo et al., 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
10
The system design, security mechanisms, and verification methods presented in the remainder of this
chapter are derived from these objectives.
System Design
The SIDC is a cyber-physical system that executes AI model inference workloads under explicit constraints
on information flow, physical access, matter and energy transfer, and operational authority. It enforces the
principle of least privilege under a default-deny, fail-secure policy. Our design philosophy is described by
three architectural invariants (detailed further in the “Security Guarantees” section): realm partitioning,
fixed diode-gated realm topology, and formally verified cross-boundary protocols. Each is summarized in
the next section.
The system is partitioned into a finite set of mutually isolated realms, each with a formally defined set of
privileges. A realm is a physically isolated domain with exclusive control over its computational resources,
storage, devices, and personnel access. Each realm defines inbound and outbound interfaces and a set of
capabilities governing cross-realm interactions. All computation, storage, devices, sensors, actuators, and
human interactions are assigned to specific realms such that no component operates outside the realm model
and no realm shares a writable state with any other.
Cross-realm interactions—whether data, personnel, or matter—occur only through predefined inter -
faces with authenticated end points; all other interactions are prohibited. Energy flows, such as power deliv -
ery, thermal dissipation, and electromagnetic emissions, are continuously measured and bounded, and any
deviations from predefined profiles are treated as unauthorized interactions. The SIDC enforces fail-secure
semantics: Any deviation from expected control, data, matter, energy, or personnel flows triggers a hazard,
followed by immediate containment actions. All realms are equipped with a secure audit system that guar -
antees synchronous log availability for all intra-realm and inter-realm interactions for hazard analysis and
resolution. Together, these mechanisms ensure that compromise of any single realm cannot yield unauthor -
ized privileges or lateral access to other realms.
Security Guarantees
The security strategy is derived from the STPA-Sec product, in which the defined security measures enforce
constraints to prevent hazardous states and thereby avoid unacceptable losses. Appendix A provides the enu-
merated goals, losses, and hazards for the SIDC. These measures are not intended to be applied selectively;
they function as an integrated system whose effectiveness depends on the integrity of the whole. Because
comprehensive prevention of hazard states is not possible, the security strategy is underpinned by tailored
detection and response procedures to recover from fail-secure events.
Confidentiality and integrity of inference computation together form the central security objective of the
SIDC. Under the threat model defined previously, the system’s architecture ensures that conditions leading to
a violation of confidentiality or integrity are unreachable. As mentioned above, this assurance rests on three
architectural invariants:
1.
 Re
alm partitioning. The system is decomposed into mutually distrustful security domains, each
treated as a potentially adversarial principal. No realm assumes the correctness or benign nature of
any other.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Security Strategy
11
2. Fixed diode-gated realm topology. All inter-realm communication traverses data diodes arranged
i
n a fixed, immutable topology. These diodes enforce unidirectional information flow at the physical
layer, eliminating reverse-channel and covert-channel creation by construction.
3. Fo
rmally verified cross-boundary protocols. Every dataflow crossing a realm boundary is mediated
by a protocol implementation that has been verified against its security specification. This reduces
the trusted software surface to the cross-realm protocol layer, which can be compromised only in
the event that an attacker is successful in bypassing the trusted setup procedures or as a result of
an insider threat that is beyond the SIDC’s tolerable threshold. Intra-realm software, except cryp -
tographic key management, is untrusted by design and cannot alone cause an unacceptable loss of
confidentiality or integrity.
These three architectural invariants do not merely harden the system but also enable enforcement of the
following five security properties:
•
 P1
: Cross-boundary flow containment. Every flow of data, energy, matter, or personnel between realms
is an element of a fixed set of authorized interactions established during trusted setup. No flow outside
this set can be instantiated at runtime without triggering a hazard.
•
 P2
: Realm-level computational-state confidentiality. Plaintext computational state is confined to the
realm in which it originates and cannot cross a realm boundary except through explicitly authorized
output channels. In the primary case, all Trusted Inference Compute Sanctum (TICS) runtime state,
including model weights, inference algorithm, intermediate tokens, and reference data, exists in plain -
text only within the TICS boundary, with no computational state exiting the TICS except finalized
inference responses delivered to the Interface Room (IR).
•
 P3
: Integrity of inference. Dataflow integrity of the inference response is enforced throughout its life
cycle. This is guaranteed through cryptographic integrity verification of the inference computation, the
context retrieved from the reference data storage, and periodic verification of model weights and refer -
ence data storage against the golden state maintained in the Trustworthy Recovery Vault (TRV) realm.
•
 P4
: Assured recovery. For all failure modes except physical compromise of the TRV, the system can
recover to a known-good, authenticated operational state.
• P5
: Cross-realm privilege separation. Compromise of any single realm yields no unauthorized capa -
bility in any other realm.
Each security property is maintained by a pipeline of hazard prevention, detection, and response. Archi -
tectural constraints prevent defined classes of violations by construction. Where prevention is infeasible,
continuous monitoring detects hazard conditions, and the system executes an immediate fail-secure state
transition. Together, these security properties encapsulate our defense-in-depth approach: P1 contains all
cross-boundary flows to a fixed, enumerated set. P2 layers a confidentiality guarantee over the computa -
tional state of a realm. P3 ensures that the computation isolated by P2 is authentic. P4 makes detection of any
violation of P1, P2, and P3 meaningful by providing a credible recovery path. P5 bounds the impact of any
breach to a single realm.
Conceptual Architecture and Realm Descriptions
The facility implements defense-in-depth through nested physical and logical boundaries as shown in
Figure 3.1. A guarded perimeter fence defines the outer site boundary. Within this perimeter, the facility is
partitioned into eight functionally and physically isolated realms: the IR, the Payload Exchange Room (PER),

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
12
the TICS, the TRV, Information Technology Management (ITM), the Protection Operations Center (POC),
Utility, and Restroom. We describe each realm below:
• IR—t
he sole interface between external inference users and the TICS. The IR receives authenticated
inference requests and delivers responses, screening plaintext inputs and outputs but never handling
model weights or inference runtime state.
•
 PER—
the proxy for legitimate payloads inbound to and outbound from the SIDC facility. Inbound,
only two legitimate payloads are accepted. These are the inference prompt (proxied to the IR) and refer-
ence data updates (proxied to the ITM). Outbound, the only accepted payload is a legitimate inference
response.
•
 ITM—
trusted to ingest and validate vetted reference data under two-person integrity controls and is
required for the trusted setup phase of SIDC, including compute hardware, encrypted model weights,
and initial state for the reference data storage.
•
 TIC
S—the most critical security perimeter, housing model weights, the inference algorithm, reference
data storage, and all compute hardware. All cross-boundary flows are eliminated or reduced to single-
bit control signals, with the sole exceptions of inbound inference requests from the IR, outbound infer -
ence responses to the IR, and inbound pre-staged reference data from the ITM.
•
 TRV—
the integrity anchor for the TICS. The TRV stores protected, read-only copies of critical system
state and reference measurements used for integrity verification and recovery. It is connected to only
the TICS and the ITM, providing reference baselines against which both realms verify the authenticity
of their operational state. The TRV remains quiescent during normal operation and is activated only
during system initialization or in response to a hazard.
•
 POC—
the facility’s centralized security oversight and incident response authority. The POC receives
hazard signals and telemetry from all realms through dedicated unidirectional inbound channels and
maintains outbound control and signaling channels to all realms, including the sole authority to trigger
a temporary or destructive shutdown. The POC is fully isolated from model data and computation (i.e.,
its channels carry only control signals and hazard telemetry, never inference data).
•
 Uti
lity—supplies power to other realms in the facility, performs conditioning on energy flows crossing
the facility boundary to mitigate the risk of unauthorized information channels being constructed in
the energy flow, and is responsible for cooling activities.
•
 Re
stroom—routine use for facility personnel provides a source of drinking water, sink water, and toilet
waste disposal water. Supplied by an on-site well for inbound water and an on-site septic system for
outbound waste. Both directions of matter flow are designed with special attention to the risk of covert
information channels.
Inter-realm information channels are actuated using unidirectional control signals transmitted through
diodes and after actuation are authenticated using post-quantum cryptographic primitives. Personnel move-
ment and matter exchange across realm boundaries are governed by strict access control and two-person
integrity controls, respectively.
Trusted Setup Procedures to Establish Integrity Basis
Prior to operational deployment, the SIDC undergoes a trusted setup phase that establishes the root of trust
for all subsequent security guarantees, encompassing secure construction of the facility, hardware ingestion,
cryptographic key initialization, and ingestion of model weights and the initial state of the reference data
storage.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Security Strategy
13
Facility construction is conducted under continuous physical security and chain-of-custody controls. All
hardware undergoes destructive sampling and verification prior to installation. After verification, compo -
nents that pass are sealed, logged, and installed under two-person integrity controls. Cryptographic key
material, including realm identity, channel authentication, and attestation keys, is generated within the facil-
ity boundary, bound to verified hardware, and never derived from externally held secrets. Once the crypto -
graphic infrastructure is established, model weights and the reference data storage are ingested into the TICS
and verified against provider-supplied reference measurements.
All reference measurements established during trusted setup, including hardware attestation baselines,
cryptographic key bindings, model weight digests, and reference data fingerprints, are stored in the TRV as
the authoritative basis for integrity verification throughout the facility’s operational lifetime.
An important note on the effectiveness requirement for both the hardware and software screening activi-
ties: Unless otherwise noted (e.g., for hardware-based cryptographic root of trust), these screening and risk-
reduction activities for the hardware and software acquired and ingested for use in the facility are assumed
to fail in comprehensively achieving their aims. Furthermore, we assume that successful supply chain com -
promise of commodity compute hardware and of software components in the inference stack is not only
possible but likely. We plan accordingly in the security strategy. The purpose of undertaking these imperfect
risk-reduction activities is to increase the cost and complexity of a successful attack.
Inference Life-Cycle Activities
Following the trusted setup, the SIDC enters its operational state, and the TICS holds verified model weights
and reference data storage. The life cycle of a single inference request then proceeds as follows:
•
 As
sumptions
 – Th
e SIDC site is within walking distance of a facility with classified network connectivity.
FIGURE 3.1
Conceptual Diagram of the SIDC
Site
Facility
Intra-facility information /f_low
External information /f_low
IR POC
ITM
TICS
TRV
Restroom
PER
Utility

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
14
 – The SIDC and the adjacent classified facility are connected by three one-way, tailored point-to-
p
oint links. Each of these links is a separate instance of the feature that we label the Secure Transfer
Inter-facility Conduit (STIC). Each STIC is responsible for a single message type: inference prompts
inbound, inference responses outbound, and reference data inbound.
 – Pr
ompts and responses are encrypted and digitally signed before being transported between facili -
ties.
 – Re
quired SIDC constraints are enforced during each transaction.
• Ou
tside the SIDC
 – A nat
ional security official in a classified facility (hereafter referred to as the end user ) specifies an
inference prompt. This prompt is transferred via a classified network from the end user’s location to
the classified facility adjacent to the SIDC site.
 – Th
e prompt is transferred from the classified network to the inbound prompt STIC for transport into
the SIDC.
• In
side the SIDC
 – Th
e PER ingests the prompt from the STIC and transfers it to the IR.
 – IR p
ersonnel screen the input to assess compliance and to protect against adversarial inputs.
 – Th
e screened request is transmitted to the TICS over an authenticated channel.
 – Th
e TICS executes the inference workload using the resident model and reference data storage.
 – Th
e TICS verifies that the resident model weights and reference data storage match the reference
measurements stored in the TRV, ensuring that the inference response was generated using authen -
ticated artifacts.
 – Th
e TICS returns the finalized response to the IR.
 – IR p
ersonnel screen the output, as on the inbound path.
 – IR t
ransfers the response back to the PER.
 – Th
e PER transfers the response to the outbound response STIC.
• Ou
tside the SIDC
 – Th
e adjacent classified facility receives the response via its response STIC.
 – Th
e response is transferred via a classified network back to the end user.
We have estimated the total round-trip time for a user to submit a prompt to the SIDC and receive an
inference response back, including those activities that occur outside the SIDC. The total figure is an estimate
of the overhead, not including the time required for the model to perform inference computation. A conser -
vative range for the overhead of a full inference-response life cycle is three to five minutes. Human-mediated
review steps in the IR are the rate-limiting factor. It is plausible that the lower bound of the time estimate
could be reduced further by investing in systems that remove human-mediated processes and replace them
with machine automation—as long as such investments maintain the security constraints defined in the
Intent Specification. Such investments would likely bring the security overhead to less than one minute in
total.
Operational Limitations
The SIDC operates under extreme security conditions that impose operational limitations, which we broadly
describe here. Users desiring additional features can add them by implementing the procedures described

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Security Strategy
15
in Chapter 4. The system starts with and requires a trusted setup phase in which reference measurements
for model weights and the baseline contents of reference data storage are established; it cannot detect pre-
ingestion compromise if the trusted setup itself is compromised. The facility secures the infrastructure, not
the model’s reasoning. It does not defend against undetected biases or latent model behaviors (i.e., model
outputs being fallible).
Additionally, the SIDC’s security architecture imposes significant operational constraints, which are a
significant departure from typical commercial operations. These trade-offs stem from prioritizing confiden -
tiality and integrity against OC5-level adversaries over system availability and operational convenience. Key
trade-offs include the following:
•
 Av
ailability and latency. The SIDC prioritizes confidentiality and integrity over system availability.
The facility tolerates significant latency, necessary for screening inbound and outbound data, and may
enter a permanently inoperable state under extreme security conditions, such as detected physical com-
promise of hardware in the inner sanctum. Specifically, we estimate the total round-trip overhead time
(on top of model computation time) for an inference request to be in the range of three to five minutes,
and we believe that straightforward automation of a few non-security-critical processes could reduce it
to less than one minute. As a single physical facility, the SIDC could be rendered effectively inoperable
through physical destruction or sustained denial of access. Although the TRV preserves state for recov -
ery from hazards, operational continuity requires either a redundant site or acceptance of downtime.
While these trade-offs are likely unacceptable in globally served and commercially focused, low-latency
environments, the architecture remains suitable for some national security and other use cases in which
security requirements justify reduced availability and throughput.
•
 Li
mited connectivity and fixed software. The facility eliminates traditional network connectivity
across the perimeter; inference prompts, responses, and reference data updates cross the facility bound-
ary via the highly constrained STIC link rather than a traditional network. Software is fixed at deploy -
ment, with no updates during the five-year operational life except for scrutinized configuration changes
by on-site engineers. This ensures that attackers cannot introduce malicious code through software
updates or network channels but means that this specific facility’s software and algorithms will lag
external developments by up to five years at the end of the facility’s life. A mitigation here, given the
relatively modest costs described in Appendix B, which can achieve both security and progress velocity,
could be to build new small data centers on a rolling basis, if one desires.
•
 Spe
cial-purpose design. Industry-standard data centers make heavy use of general-purpose comput -
ing and network equipment. At the decisive points where we choose to throttle potential attacks on the
SIDC, we have deliberately avoided general-purpose components and have instead opted for special-
purpose design. Minimal and tailored component engineering greatly reduces the attack surface that
would otherwise be present in general computing equipment. This decision comes with additional time
and capital requirements.
•
 Re
stricted physical inputs. Matter transfers are tightly constrained and largely limited to humans and
facility-authorized clothing. All hardware, including spare components for anticipated failures and
destructive testing, is staged during construction. This mitigates the risk of postdeployment supply
chain attacks during operations but locks in compute capabilities at construction time, which degrade
relative to leading-edge chips over the facility’s lifetime. A possible mitigation for this limitation mirrors
the one proposed above for software: rolling construction of small data centers.
•
 Mi
nimal human presence. Personnel access is restricted to essential functions only. Maintenance,
emergency response, and routine operations are performed by permanent facility employees rather than
by those with an ephemeral facility presence, minimizing the counterintelligence and insider-threat

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
16
burden for presence inside the facility. This reduces flexibility and may require maintaining specialized
expertise on site.
These constraints trade operational flexibility for high-confidence protection. While severe by general-
purpose commercial standards, they address scenarios in which security requirements justify substantial
inconvenience (i.e., national security applications involving classified information or emergency contain -
ment of dangerous AI capabilities). We acknowledge that the security strategy presented up to this point may
sound familiar to national security professionals. We believe that the SIDC differs most heavily from the
status quo in its tailored path to engineering closure, described in the next chapter.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
17
CHAPTER 4
Concept to Circuit
This chapter describes a concept-to-circuit template that extends the SIDC security strategy. The central
idea is that the design and engineering of security-critical features should not begin with general-purpose
components that are constrained after the fact. Instead, these features must derive from (and trace back to)
the strategic losses that the system must prevent, the hazards that could lead to those losses, and the system
constraints that prevent those hazards. The resulting components should realize only the minimum func -
tion needed to satisfy feature requirements and security constraints. Excess capacity in any system, beyond
the minimum required to support specified requirements, represents unnecessary risk and a possible attack
surface that an adversary can leverage.
As stated above, many efforts to design and deploy secure information systems begin by attempting to
constrain the behavior of general-purpose components and protocols. We fundamentally diverge from this
approach. When we choose to enforce a security boundary, we start with specification and strict enforcement
of transaction policies across all forms of matter, energy, and information. The starting constraint is that all
transactions of all types are unauthorized. The system enforces this constraint using SecDOP: Prevent haz -
ards when possible, and monitor, detect, respond, and recover when prevention is infeasible.
After achieving sufficient confidence that unauthorized transactions are impossible or detectable,
the design process builds upward from the physical layer and hardware to support the specific features
required, and nothing else. For example, at the physical layer, an information channel should not have any
information-theoretic capacity that is not strictly required. At selected decisive points in environments in
which information-related losses have catastrophic consequences, we believe that this security approach is
necessary.
The purpose of this chapter is not to provide a complete implementation manual for an SIDC. Rather, it
demonstrates how the security strategy can be made concrete for one security-critical subsystem, the cross-
realm solution (CRS). The CRS example illustrates how a feature moves from system-level security intent
to a protocol, from a protocol to finite-state behavior, and from finite-state behavior to hardware-realizable
circuit logic with verification evidence.
Example: Cross-Realm Solution
The most mature example of the concept-to-circuit approach is the CRS, the mechanism that mediates
authorized transactions across SIDC security boundaries. The CRS is not a generic data transfer device; each
instance is engineered to its authorized transaction and constraints. Each CRS facilitates a single cross-realm
flow. For all other cases, the CRS prevents or detects and fails securely.
The CRS exists to prevent losses involving disclosure or corruption of protected information. At the
hazard level, it addresses unauthorized information transfer across realm boundaries. At the constraint level,
it enforces the rule that only authorized transactions of specified types may cross a boundary and only under
specified conditions. At the requirement level, this becomes a set of rules about message type, directional -

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
18
ity, sequencing, end-point authentication, malformed input handling, state transitions, and hazard response.
The CRS is therefore a pathfinder for the SIDC’s larger engineering claim that security-critical controls
should be derived from system constraints, not from the latent capabilities of general-purpose communica -
tion equipment.
The SIDC architecture depends on the ability to permit a very small number of controlled transactions
between otherwise isolated realms. The most sensitive of these interactions involve the TICS boundary,
where model weights, inference runtime state, and protected computation reside. The CRS is intended to
provide a repeatable pattern for these high-consequence boundary crossings.
The CRS supports the SIDC’s architectural invariants in the following ways:
•
 Re
alm partitioning. The CRS assumes that the source and destination realms are separate security
domains. It does not require either realm to trust the internal correctness of the other.
• Fi
xed diode-gated topology. The CRS is designed around a physically constrained direction of high-
bandwidth dataflow. It does not provide a general bidirectional network connection.
• Fo
rmally specified cross-boundary behavior. CRS behavior is expressed as a finite-state protocol with
defined transitions, timing bounds, authentication requirements, and fail-secure states.
This combination matters because a cross-realm mechanism is one of the places where small design errors
can invalidate the security architecture. A conventional network connection between realms would intro -
duce a large, general-purpose attack surface. The CRS instead narrows the boundary to a specific transaction
pattern: Authenticate the end point, enable a one-way data path for an authorized transfer, and close or block
the path when the transaction completes or when any hazard is detected.
The CRS pathfinder decomposes the subsystem into circuit-relevant elements. At a high level, these
include
•
 tr
ansmit-side logic (TX), responsible for preparing or presenting authorized outbound transactions
• re
ceive-side logic (RX), responsible for accepting only authorized inbound transactions
• ch
annel-control logic (CC), responsible for enforcing the transaction policy and state-machine behavior
that governs the channel.
Assurance Path for the CRS
The CRS is a useful pathfinder because it exercises the full concept-to-circuit assurance chain. The assurance
argument does not rest on any single tool. Instead, each layer supports a different type of claim.
At the system level, STPA-Sec identifies unauthorized information transfer across a realm boundary as a
hazard and derives constraints on authorized transactions. System modeling then records the CRS bound -
ary, interfaces, component responsibilities, and requirement allocation.
At the first level of protocol specification, the CRS is specified as a finite-state interaction between the
source transmitter and the destination channel controller, with explicit states, transitions, timing con -
straints, authentication requirements, and hazard behavior. This specification is written in a form suitable
for formalization.
At the formal protocol level, cryptographic analysis evaluates whether the authentication and session-
establishment design supports such claims as secrecy, authentication, replay resistance, and key freshness
under the stated assumptions. Symbolic and computational tools are useful for different parts of this level.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Concept to Circuit
19
At the state-machine level, model checking can evaluate whether the abstract CRS control logic permits
unsafe reachable states, such as data transfer before authentication, simultaneous incompatible modes, or
failure to enter a blocked state after a hazard.
At the hardware-design level, the CRS behavior can be translated into synthesizable hardware logic.
Circuit-level assertions can then check that selected temporal properties hold in the register-transfer level
implementation, such as “data-transfer active implies authenticated state” or “hazard assertion forces transi -
tion to block.” The resulting assurance chain is summarized in Table 4.1.
This evidence does not amount to absolute proof that the CRS, or the SIDC, is secure. Rather, it provides
structured, reviewable evidence for specific claims at specific layers of abstraction. That is the appropriate
role of formal methods in a security-critical system.
Trustworthiness and Formal Methods
Formal methods are foundational to the SIDC pathfinder, but they are not a panacea. They do not eliminate
the need for systems security engineering, expert judgment, testing, red-team evaluation, operational dis -
cipline, or accreditation. Formal verification can only prove properties that have been specified within the
assumptions of the model and the scope of the tool. If the wrong property is specified, if a key assumption
is omitted, or if the implementation departs from the verified model, the formal result may provide false
confidence.
The value of formal methods in the model presented in this report is more precise. Their use delivers
reproducible evidence of trustworthiness at security-critical points in the architecture. It forces ambiguity
out of specifications, exposes hidden assumptions, and makes certain classes of errors machine checkable.
When connected to STPA-Sec and systems engineering artifacts, it also supports traceability and auditing.
A circuit-level assertion can be traced to a component requirement all the way up to an unacceptable loss at
the system level.
TABLE 4.1
Assurance Chain Summary (Highest Abstraction to Lowest)
Assurance Layer Example Artifact Primary Claim Supported
STPA-Sec and system
constraints
Hazard and constraint traceability CRS is necessary and addresses a specific class of
unacceptable losses.
System model Realm and interface allocation CRS components and interfaces are correctly placed
within the architecture.
Protocol specification CRS finite-state protocol Authorized behavior, sequencing, timing, and
fail-secure transitions are defined.
Cryptographic protocol
analysis
Authentication and
session-establishment model
End-point authentication, secrecy, replay resistance,
and key freshness hold under the stated assumptions.
State-machine model
checking
Abstract CRS control model Unsafe control states are unreachable within the
modeled behavior.
Hardware implementation Synthesizable logic The protocol can be realized without importing
general-purpose communication behavior.
Circuit-level assertions Temporal assertions over hardware
logic
Selected safety properties hold at the signal and cycle
level.
Test and red-team
evaluation
Integrated system evidence The implemented CRS behaves correctly under realistic
operational and adversarial conditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
20
Producing trustworthy formal-methods evidence requires several ingredients:
• A cl
ear security objective at the appropriate level of abstraction. The property being verified must be
tied to a system-level constraint or security guarantee.
• A su
fficiently precise specification. Informal protocol or component descriptions must be translated
into formal models without losing essential behavior.
• Ex
plicit assumptions. Environmental conditions, adversary capabilities, timing assumptions, trust
boundaries, and input constraints must be stated.
• To
ol-appropriate scope. Different tools support different claims.
• Tr
aceability. Verification artifacts should connect back to requirements, constraints, hazards, losses,
and goals.
• Ind
ependent review. Formal models and proofs require expert review because the most-important
errors often appear in the modeling assumptions rather than in the tool output.
• In
tegration with ordinary systems engineering life-cycle activities. Testing, verification, validation,
red-team evaluation, configuration management, and operational monitoring remain necessary.
The SIDC security strategy treats formal methods as part of a broader trustworthiness argument. They
are strongest when used to support narrow, security-critical claims at well-defined boundaries. They are
weakest when treated as a general substitute for systems security engineering.
Concept-to-Circuit Methodology
The top-down path from concept to circuit requires multiple tools and methods, each operating at a different
level of abstraction and retaining the intent of its parent levels. Not every tool applies to every feature, and
not every feature requires circuit-level realization. The point of the stack is not to impose a rigid sequencing
or selection but to maintain security continuity throughout the engineering life cycle.
Within a realized component, every circuit-level operation, protocol rule, and subsystem behavior verifi -
ably enforces security constraints derived from the STPA-Sec results.
In practice, the concept-to-circuit process asks five recurring questions:
1.
 Wh
y is this control necessary?
 – Th
e control must be justified by a system goal or user need. If the control is not necessary, it should
not exist.
2. Wh
ich losses and hazards does the control affect?
 – Th
e control must be traceable to the unacceptable losses that it helps prevent and to the hazards that
it could help create or mitigate.
3. Wh
ich constraints govern the control?
 – Th
e control must have explicitly defined authorized and unauthorized behaviors, including how it
handles malformed input, timing deviations, abnormal state transitions, and hazardous conditions.
4. Wh
at is the minimum mechanism that satisfies those constraints?
 – Th
e control should be implemented with the least functionality, least privilege, and least information-
carrying capacity needed to perform its intended role.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Concept to Circuit
21
5. What evidence supports trust in the control?
 – Th
e control must have verification, validation, testing, review, and operational evidence appropriate
to its security significance.
This structure provides a disciplined method to determine whether a proposed control is justified, what it
is allowed to do, how it must fail, and how its correctness should be evaluated. Appendix C documents and
summarizes the specific tools and methods used to develop the CRS.
At a high level, our concept-to-circuit path follows the structure shown in Figure 4.1.
FIGURE 4.1
Concept-to-Circuit Path
Concept
Circuit
Goals
(G1, G2, Gn...)
Losses
(L1, L2, Ln...)
Hazards
(H1, H2, Hn...)
Constraints
(C1, C2, Cn...)
UCAs
(UCA1, UCA2, UCAn...)
Scenarios
(S1, S2, Sn...)
System
requirements
(SR1, SR2, SRn...)
Component
requirements
(CR1, CR2, CRn...)
Protocol
speci/f_ication
(P1, P2, Pn...)
Component
model
(CM1, CM2, CMn...)
Protocol
veri/f_ication
Component
speci/f_ication
(e.g., CRS)
Circuit-level
implementation
(RX, TX, CC)
Formal
veri/f_ication
NOTE: CC = channel controller; RX = receiver; TX = transmitter; UCA = unsafe control action.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
22
Next Steps
The CRS implementation work is relatively mature compared with other backlog items. We have developed
detailed designs for a protocol-specific CRS and have begun mapping the design to formal specification and
verification artifacts. However, this report intentionally provides only limited CRS implementation detail.
The important point for the public version of this report is not the specific circuit design but the method lead-
ing to its creation. Security-critical cross-realm behavior is derived from constraints and security guarantees,
not from the capabilities of general-purpose communication equipment.
The concept-to-circuit process must also be applied to all other security-critical features before the SIDC
begins operating. Some of these features may require CRS variants; others may require new system models,
protocols, or verification artifacts. At this stage, we treat these as implementation backlog elements rather
than as fully specified solutions.
Features not yet engineered to the circuit level of precision include the following:
•
 Ha
zard management. This includes a facility controller in the POC realm, a realm controller in every
realm, and a realm child template for both sensors and actuators.
• Reco
very and reconstitution. The system must define how the trusted state is preserved, restored, or
deliberately destroyed under different hazard conditions. This also includes development of the com -
ponents in the TRV.
• Ref
erence data ingestion. Controlled updates to reference data storage require thorough treatment
because they introduce new information into protected environments.
• Eva
luation. If users require model evaluation or monitoring capabilities, those features must be added
without creating unauthorized channels into or out of the TICS.
• Ag
entic interaction. More-interactive or more-agentic use cases require new protocols, hazard analyses,
and constraints because they can involve repeated tool use, stateful interaction, or more-complex trans-
action patterns.
Again, these backlog items must not be completed by importing general-purpose capabilities into the
SIDC. Each should be justified by a user need, traced to system goals, analyzed for unique hazards, con -
strained, specified, and verified in proportion to its security significance.
The concept-to-circuit process does not replace the rest of traditional systems engineering. In parallel
with the steps above, the other elements of engineering and assurance must still be performed, including test-
ing, verification, validation, red-team evaluation, configuration management, accreditation, operational pro-
cedure development, and maintenance planning. These activities are necessary to ensure that the designed
feature performs as expected in the integrated system and under realistic operational conditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
23
CHAPTER 5
Conclusions and Recommendations
This chapter summarizes the overarching conclusions drawn from the analysis and recommended next steps
for implementation.
Effective Security Requires Purpose-Built, Security-First Facilities
General-purpose data centers present too much attack surface to confidently protect against the most-
sophisticated and most-motivated adversaries. We conclude that OC5-level security cannot be achieved by
layering controls onto general-purpose systems. Although this approach may be appropriate for lower levels
of security, it is inadequate to defend against the most-sophisticated adversaries.
It is our assessment that meeting the security objective with current technology requires (1) purpose-built
facilities where functions not essential to the system goals are excluded rather than merely controlled, (2) a
security-first design approach in which security is consistently prioritized over other factors, and (3) signifi -
cant operational restrictions, many of which will incur productivity penalties relative to standard commer -
cial operations.
Such Security Is Appropriate for Only Targeted Use Cases
The SIDC is estimated to cost $37 million to $345 million depending on scale (see Appendix B). Although
cost is not insignificant, it is unlikely to be the decisive barrier for stakeholders considering such a facility.
Rather, operational restrictions (e.g., fixed software, limited throughput, strict access controls) will constrain
potential use cases and present barriers to broader adoption. Organizations seeking to prioritize model avail-
ability over security will likely find the SIDC incompatible with their operational requirements. We therefore
see the SIDC as most appropriate for three potential use cases:
•
 Na
tional security applications. Inference deployments supporting the most sensitive intelligence
analysis and strategic decisionmaking will be exceptionally high-value targets for nation-state adversar-
ies seeking to manipulate model outputs, exfiltrate classified data, or influence decisions at the highest
levels. The SIDC presented in this report is intended to provide high-assurance security for such cases.
•
 Em
ergency response capability. If security requirements arise rapidly because of emerging capabilities
(e.g., biological weapon design), the ability to rapidly secure frontier models becomes critical. An SIDC
with purpose-built security for that use case can meet this need.
•
 Pi
lot and testbed deployment. A small-scale SIDC can be used to validate security architectures, oper -
ational procedures, and integration approaches to derisk larger-scale build-outs and investments.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
24
Recommended Next Steps
Key early steps to deploying an SIDC include the following:
• Beg
in procurement. For the national security use case, the U.S. government should initiate procure -
ment, engage a system integrator, and begin detailed design and engineering. Industry or public-interest
organizations could pursue similar efforts in parallel for other use cases.
• Se
lect a site early. Major construction phases are largely sequential, making early site selection critical
to minimizing the total project duration. For rapid deployment, housing the SIDC within an existing
facility, such as a building on an existing cleared campus or even an aircraft hangar, can bypass or sig -
nificantly shorten key development steps.
•
 Pr
ototype key security features and integration now. FPGA-based channel control with formally
verified protocols and optical diode–enforced unidirectional dataflows can be tested immediately by
any interested party, independently of steps above. Integrating this relatively novel application into a
small-scale, end-to-end inference system with other targeted security mechanisms presents a lower-cost
opportunity to reduce technical risk and prevent downstream delays.
Conclusion
The SIDC can be constructed today using a novel combination of proven components and established secu -
rity techniques: No fundamental research breakthroughs are required. We have high confidence that a well-
implemented SIDC, following the specifications and designs presented in this report, can successfully defend
against OC5-level threats. We recommend that relevant stakeholders move rapidly to construct an SIDC,
either for critical national security applications or to provide emergency response capabilities.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
25
APPENDIX A
STPA-Sec Outputs
As described in Chapter 2, system goals, unacceptable losses, hazards, and system constraints are key out -
puts from the STPA-Sec analysis. Table A.1 presents the goals, losses, and primary hazards for the SIDC. The
complete analysis includes sub-hazards and system constraints, which are excluded from this public report.
TABLE A.1
STPA-Sec Outputs for the SIDC
Identifier Output
System goals
G1 Maintain national technical and military advantage as outlined in the National Security Strategy.
G1.1 Maintain a six-month lead on adversaries and competitors.
G1.1.1 Maintain or increase blue velocity.
G1.1.2 Deny red acceleration from U.S. AI development.
G2 Prevent global catastrophic harm from U.S. frontier models.
G3 Support efficient, effective, frontier AI model operations.
G4 Develop a safe, usable system for national security application.
G5 Enforce containment of the AI model within the SIDC.
Unacceptable losses
L1 Model weights disclosed outside the SIDC
L2 Tokens disclosed outside the SIDC
L3 Algorithmic insights disclosed outside the SIDC
L4 An incident related to an SIDC mission directly causes another mission to fail
L5 Loss of or damage to SIDC
Hazards
H1 Unauthorized or “malformed” data enter or exist inside the facility.
H2 Unauthorized or “malformed” data leave the facility.
H3 Unauthorized person enters or exists inside the facility.
H4 Unauthorized person leaves the facility.
H5 Malicious, unwitting, or opportunistic insider compromises the facility.
H6 Unauthorized entity reads SIDC data.
H7 Non-POC element of the SIDC remains in operation while a hazard is unresolved.
H8 Unauthorized modification of SIDC occurs.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
26
Identifier Output
H9 Unauthorized matter transits a realm boundary.
H10 Unauthorized energy transits a realm boundary.
H11 Unauthorized information transits a realm boundary.
Table A.1—Continued

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
27
APPENDIX B
Time and Cost to Implement an SIDC
This appendix provides estimates for the cost and time to implement an SIDC.
System Size
We consider two representative cases: (1) the minimum scale needed for a functioning proof of concept and
(2) a deployment-scale facility capable of hosting multiple models and providing inference at scale.
Proof of Concept (250 kW)
The minimal configuration is a 3,000 ft 2 facility with 250 kW of compute (about 150 inference accelerators).
This scale represents a minimal configuration for a fully functional facility serving low-throughput infer -
ence with a frontier model. This example is most relevant for those seeking to implement a proof of concept,
either to generate learning for security best practices that can be applied elsewhere or to derisk larger-scale
build-outs in the future.
Enterprise Scale (3 MW)
For deployment scale, we assume 3 MW of compute (about 400 inference accelerators) within a 30,000 ft 2
facility. This configuration could host multiple frontier-scale models, provide operational redundancy
against hardware failures, and support an inference query throughput to support many simultaneous users
(not commercial scale but ample for the use cases envisioned here).
Cost
For new construction, including land acquisition, the proof-of-concept SIDC is projected to cost $37 million
to $50 million, while the enterprise scale facility is projected to cost $277 million to $345 million. The cost
breakdown is shown in Table B.1.
The estimates above represent up-front capital expenditures required to deploy the system. Operational
costs for staffing, utilities, maintenance, and other ongoing costs are not included in these estimates.
An important cost element is the development of the FPGA-based channel control system. Formally veri-
fied FPGA logic is a critical element of the overall security strategy. While FPGAs are not expensive, devel -
oping custom, formally verified protocols will require a specialized and limited talent pool. A functional
prototype is estimated to cost less than $10 million; if successful, it should scale to full SIDC implementation
at relatively modest additional cost. We estimate the cost for an implemented solution (including prototyp -
ing) to be $10 million to $15 million for the proof-of-concept SIDC and $15 million to $22.5 million for the
deployment-scale SIDC.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
28
Software inspections are another notable cost element. We recommend scrutinizing general-purpose and
inference-specific software before deploying in the SIDC, which is expected to cost a few million dollars. 1
Vulnerabilities discovered in that process may warrant memory-safe rewrites or other remediations, the cost
of which are not included here. We emphasize, however, that these measures are best-effort and their comple-
tion is not mandatory for the security strategy. In contrast, the custom FPGA implementations governing
information flow across realm boundaries require formal verification and absolute correctness.
1 This estimate was derived from several 2024 to 2025 Forrester consulting case studies that included software developer and
security efficiency improvements costs per year over a three-year period. Our cited cost is the midpoint average of similar
software inspection efforts. See Forrester Consulting, 2025; Forrester Consulting, 2024a; and Forrester Consulting, 2024b.
TABLE B.1
Cost Estimates for Proof-of-Concept and Deployment-Scale SIDCs
Component
Proof of Concept
(million $)
Deployment Scale
(million $) Notes
Land 0.4 4.0 Assuming $266,000 per acre (2025 data); a 1.5 and
15 acres for a proof-of-concept and deployment-scale
SIDC, respectively
Facility construction 5.6 48.0 Assuming $1,600 per ft 2; 3,500 ft2 and 30,000 ft 2b
Compute hardware 12.0–16.0 150–200 AI-optimized server racks plus extra for destructive
hardware testing and on-site stockpile to account for
failure rates; 150 graphics processing units (GPUs) and
375 GPUs
c
Networking and
balance of system
1.7 21.6 Switches, fiber-optic diodes, and rack management
security controls, plus replacement hardware stockpile
(one-third of components)
Software inspection 1.4–3.2 2.1–4.8 Review of existing code for vulnerabilities; selective
memory-safe rewrites not included
d
Channel controller
development
10.0–15.0 15.0–22.5 Formally verified FPGA channel controllers to establish
strict controls on the multi-bit channels and optical
diodes to enforce unidirectional dataflows
Initial security vetting of
personnel
2.3 6.9 Background investigations and adjudications for security
clearances; ~100 cleared staff for a proof-of-concept
SIDC and 300 for a deployment-scale SIDC
e
General contractor
overhead and profit
4.0–5.3 29.7–36.9 12% of above costs
Total estimated cost ≈$37–$50 ≈$277–$345 Order-of-magnitude estimate
a Brian Ungles, John McWilliams, Ethan Tribble, Adrian Conforti, and Jason D’Orlando, Data Center Development Cost Guide 2025 , Cushman &
Wakefield, 2025.
b For reference, the high end of construction cost for a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) is $1,000 to 1,200 per ft 2. See Alex
Leutwyler, “Decoding SCIF Costs: What Drives the Price of Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities,” Emblem Builders blog, last updated
October 18, 2025; Charles Simmins, “What Is a SCIF,” ClearanceJobs blog, April 1, 2024.
c Costs are based on vendor quotes for GPUs as of summer 2025. Public analysis finds a comparable cost per rack. See Dylan Patel and Daniel
Nishball, “H100 vs GB200 NVL72 Training Benchmarks—Power, TCO, and Reliability Analysis, Software Improvement over Time,” SemiAnalysis,
August 20, 2025. Although we used GPUs for the cost estimate, we are agnostic to the underlying compute hardware (GPUs, tensor processing
units, application-specific integrated circuits).
d Costs are estimated based on the average from several Forrester case studies. See Forrester Consulting, The Total Economic Impact of
Revenera: Cost Savings and Business Benefits Enabled by Revenera , May 2025; Forrester Consulting, The Total Economic Impact of the Veracode
Application Risk Management Platform: Cost Savings and Business Benefits Enabled by Veracode , August 2024b; and Forrester Consulting, The
Total Economic Impact of Checkmarx One: Cost Savings and Business Benefits Enabled by the Checkmarx One Platform , March 2024a.
e Top Secret background investigations cost $6,739 per person (plus $3,866 for periodic reinvestigations) according to fiscal year 2026 billing
rates. See Federal Investigations Notice No. 24-01, “Products and Services Reimbursable Billing Rates for FY 2025 and FY 2026,” Defense
Counterintelligence and Security Agency, August 30, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Time and Cost to Implement an SIDC
29
Implementation Timeline
Deployment Timeline Under Normal Conditions
Under normal conditions, we expect two to two and a half years to deploy the SIDC, with an additional
year to complete accreditation for handling classified materials. This timeline assumes new construction,
including land acquisition, and is based on typical procurement, permitting, construction, and accredita-
tion timelines. Note that this timeline is a reasonable baseline estimate for either the proof-of-concept or the
deployment-scale SIDC. Despite there being a roughly ten-times size difference, we conclude that the time
to complete key steps does not shift dramatically (e.g., permitting, constructing the facility itself, classified
accreditation).
Figure B.1, Panel A, shows the sequence of key development steps to implement the facility (blue bars):
site selection and land acquisition, design and engineering, permits and approvals, construction, testing and
commissioning, and classified accreditation.
FIGURE B.1
Timeline to Implement the SIDC, Normal Pace and Accelerated Pace
SOURCES: Facility construction steps are based on data from Arlene Hidalgo, “Data Center Construction: Costs, Timeline, and Delivery
Steps,” Mastt, last updated February 20, 2026; and Bray Dohrwardt, “How Long Does It Take to Develop a Data Center? A Step-by-Step
Timeline,” January 27, 2025. Timelines for software review and channel controller development are the authors’ estimates.
Security itemsFacility development
M0 M6 M12 M18 M24 M30 M36 M42 M48
Panel A. Normal pace: Facility development and security items
Facility
development
Security
items
Classi/f_ied accreditation
Testing and commissioning
Construction
Permits and approvals
Design and engineering
Site selection and land acquisition
Clearances
Software
Channel controller prototype
Channel controller scaling and integration
M0 M6 M12 M18
Month
M24 M30 M36 M42 M48
Panel B. Accelerated pace: Facility development and security
Facility
development
Security
items
Classi/f_ied accreditation
Testing and commissioning
Construction
Design and engineering
Site selection and land acquisition
Clearances
Software
Channel controller prototype
Channel controller scaling and integration

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
30
Permitting is a significant variable, with typical timelines ranging from six to 18 months depending on
the project and jurisdiction. We assume 18 months for accreditation, longer than the construction phase
itself.2 While some accreditation activities can proceed in parallel with earlier steps, it remains a key time
driver under baseline conditions.
On the security side (violet bars), we highlight four time drivers. First, we assume that all staff working
in the SIDC must hold a Top Secret security clearance, with typical background investigations and adjudica -
tions taking 8 to 18 months. 3 If staff are identified early, vetting can proceed in parallel with other develop -
ment phases. Second, software screening is assumed to take one year. This timeline can be accelerated by
dedicating additional resources; because it is a best-effort exercise rather than a critical security control, it
should never be allowed to become a bottleneck.
Finally, we divide channel controller development into two phases: prototype development (one year),
followed by scaling and integration into the SIDC (ten months, partially overlapping with prototype
development).
In summary, under normal conditions, standard facility development steps and accreditation for classi -
fied data are the key timeline drivers. Elements of the security strategy are not barriers, provided they are
pursued in parallel with facility construction.
Compressed Timelines If Pursued as a National Priority
Under emergency or national priority conditions, we estimate that the SIDC could be constructed in approxi-
mately 14 months (Figure B.1, Panel B). While limited data are available to inform these estimates, we assume
a government-owned facility constructed within an existing aircraft hangar or warehouse on an existing gov-
ernment campus. In this scenario, site selection, land acquisition, permitting, and approval processes could
be virtually eliminated.
We assume that construction times are 20 to 30 percent faster than lower-bound benchmark data, reflect-
ing accelerated efforts under national priority conditions and time savings from using an existing foundation
and utilities. Similarly, integration and testing are compressed and, where possible, conducted in parallel
with final construction stages. Because the U.S. government controls the accreditation process, we assume
that it is expedited to one month rather than the normal 12 to 18 months.
On the security side, we assume that clearances are expedited or staff are drawn from existing cleared
personnel, eliminating this as a potential bottleneck. As noted above, software screening can be accelerated
as needed and should never be allowed to constrain the schedule.
Developing the channel controllers is a potential schedule constraint. Creating and formally verifying
the FPGA-based channel control system requires highly specialized, low-density expertise and cannot be
substantially accelerated through additional funding alone. We believe that the accelerated timelines shown
(six months each for prototype and scaling and integration, with partial overlap) are plausible, although
these estimates reflect our best judgment rather than data-driven figures. Developing the channel controllers
2 Typical accreditation timelines for facilities handling classified information are based on Intelligence Community Direc -
tive 705, Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities , Office of the Director of National Intelligence, May 26, 2010; and
Department of Defense Manual 5205.07, Special Access Program Security Manual , U.S. Department of Defense, January 17,
2025. New construction generally requires 12 to 18 months for full accreditation. See Brian Metras and Tom Taylor, “Navigat -
ing the New Era of SCIF Construction,” Area Development, Q1 2025; and Briana Becker, Gordon Griffin, and Susannah L.
Gilmore, “Leasing SCIF Space: How the New ICD-705 Affects Leases,” Holland & Knight, October 30, 2025.
3 Lindy Kyzer, “How Long Does It Take to Get a Security Clearance? Times Go Up in 2024,” ClearanceJobs, November 13,
2024; GCheck Editorial Team, “How Long Does a DoD Contractor Background Check Take? 2025 Timeline,” GCheck blog,
undated.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Time and Cost to Implement an SIDC
31
should begin early and can proceed in parallel with the construction phases shown in Figure B.1. The orga -
nization developing the prototype need not be the same entity building the facility.
Note that deployment under compressed timelines adds risk. The same pressures that aim to deliver the
facility more quickly can encourage those involved to cut corners in ways that could harm security objectives.
For this reason and especially in this scenario, effective verification and validation activities are essential to
ensure that the fielded system delivers the required security outcomes.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
33
APPENDIX C
Concept-to-Circuit Tools and Methods
This appendix documents and summarizes the specific tools and methods used to formally specify the CRS.
NIST Special Publication 800-160
NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-160, Vol. 1, Rev. 1, Engineering Trustworthy Secure Systems , provides
the systems security engineering foundation for this work. 1 It emphasizes that trustworthy secure systems
require attention to three distinct contexts: the problem context, the solution context, and the trustworthi -
ness context. This framing is central to the SIDC effort. The problem context asks which losses must be pre -
vented and what hazards could lead to them. The solution context asks which system architecture, interfaces,
functions, and operational procedures can prevent or control those hazards. The trustworthiness context
asks why stakeholders should believe that the solution will perform as required in a hostile environment.
NIST SP 800-160 also provides the SecDOP, which informs the SIDC’s least-function strategy. Rather
than relying primarily on detection or administrative controls, the design seeks first to eliminate unnec -
essary function and prevent hazardous system states by construction. Where prevention is infeasible, the
design then specifies monitoring, detection, fail-secure behavior, and recovery mechanisms. In the concept-
to-circuit template, NIST SP 800-160 provides the overarching engineering philosophy and helps connect
strategic security objectives to concrete design decisions.
STPA-Sec
STPA-Sec is the structured method we use to connect high-level security strategy to concrete engineering
decisions, primarily delivering content for the problem context mentioned above.
2 It begins with the system’s
goals and unacceptable losses, then identifies the hazardous system states that could lead to those losses, the
constraints needed to prevent them, the hazardous control actions that may violate those constraints, and the
scenarios in which those hazardous actions arise.
In this report, STPA-Sec provides the upper portion of the concept-to-circuit traceability chain. It trans -
lates strategic objectives, such as protecting model weights and preventing adversarial manipulation, into
system-level hazards and security constraints. Those outputs then become the basis for the system model,
concept of secure function, protocol specifications, subsystem designs, and ultimately circuit-level mecha -
nisms. In this way, STPA-Sec helps ensure that low-level design choices remain explicitly traceable to the
strategic losses that the SIDC is intended to prevent.
1 Ross, Winstead, and McEvilley, 2022.
2 See Nancy G. Leveson, Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking Applied to Safety , MIT Press, 2012.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
34
System-Theoretic Concept Development
System-theoretic concept development extends the STPA-Sec logic into the formulation of the system con -
cept itself.3 Rather than treating the architecture as a given, this step asks what kind of system could satisfy
the constraints derived from the losses and hazards. It supports the development of the concept of secure func-
tion: a concise statement of how the system is intended to operate securely, what it must prevent, what it must
detect, and how it should respond when prevention fails.4
For the SIDC, this concept development step is where abstract constraints become architectural commit -
ments. For example, if unauthorized information transfer across a realm boundary is a hazard, the system
concept must specify how realm boundaries are defined, what transactions are authorized, what transac -
tions are impossible by construction, and what hazard response occurs when anomalous flows are detected.
The concept of secure function therefore provides the bridge between STPA-Sec outputs and the system
architecture.
System Modeling: Systems Modeling Language
For modelable elements of the system, model-based systems engineering (MBSE) can be used to represent
the system of interest and its boundaries, interfaces, functions, requirements, and allocation relationships.
These tools are most valuable where they help preserve traceability across abstraction layers: from goals and
losses to hazards, constraints, requirements, components, interfaces, and verification activities. For the SIDC
effort, we chose the Systems Modeling Language (SysML) to model relevant systems.
In the SIDC context, MBSE is useful for accurately describing realm structure, authorized interactions,
interface definitions, requirements allocation, and dependencies among features. It can also support design
review by making explicit which components or operational processes satisfy which constraints. However,
system modeling should not be confused with evidence of security. A model can organize requirements and
relationships, but it does not prove that the system is secure. Its value depends on the quality of the underly -
ing analysis and the rigor of the verification activities connected to the model.
Protocol Verification: Tamarin and CryptoVerif
For security-critical components realized in information exchange protocols, Tamarin can be used to ana -
lyze cryptographic protocol properties. Tamarin is designed to reason about symbolic protocol behavior and
can support claims about authentication, secrecy, key exchange, and adversarial interaction under formal -
ized assumptions. It is particularly useful when a security boundary depends on cryptographic guarantees
rather than only on physical separation or simple state-machine behavior.
In the concept-to-circuit path, Tamarin sits below the English-language protocol specification and above
the implementation-specific circuit or software artifacts. Its role is to help evaluate whether the protocol,
as specified, satisfies the cryptographic security properties required by the system constraints. As with all
formal tools, Tamarin’s results are conditional on the model. It can increase confidence that a modeled pro -
tocol satisfies specified properties, but it cannot prove that the implementation is correct, that all relevant
assumptions were captured, or that the system architecture around the protocol is sound.
3 Alexander P. Hillman, A Systems-Theoretic Approach to Design of Early Concepts for Novel, Complex Systems in Aerospace ,
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February 2025.
4 Ross, Winstead, and McEvilley, 2022.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Concept-to-Circuit Tools and Methods
35
CryptoVerif is an open-source formal prover written in OCaml, which, unlike Tamarin, proves security
properties for protocols in the computational model. Inputs to CryptoVerif require a description of the secu-
rity of the underlying primitives to a protocol, as well as user-provided heuristics for convergence of proofs,
which may require academic expertise. Assuming a probabilistic polynomial-time adversary, CryptoVerif
takes, as input, a protocol specification in terms of cryptographic primitives, channels, and oracles and pro -
duces a sequence of mathematical models called games, which formally prove bounds on the probability of
the adversary breaking given security properties. The granular output of CryptoVerif fills an analytic gap for
Tamarin, which assumes ideal behavior of cryptographic primitives; use of CryptoVerif methods guarantees
that both models of protocol security are addressed by formally proved security results.
Formal Specification: Temporal Logic of Actions+
Temporal Logic of Actions+ (TLA+) is the formal method we used to model protocol control logic as a dis -
tributed system and check high-level safety assumptions across the full abstract state space rather than only
in hand-selected scenarios. Applying it required translating the protocol into an explicit finite-state specifi -
cation and deciding which behaviors could be treated as atomic. That translation was itself a major source of
value: Forcing each transition and signal into precise rules exposed places where the written protocol needed
sharper operational assumptions.
The Temporal Logic Checker (TLC) then lets us reason over all reachable modeled behaviors, produc -
ing a TLA+ model and machine-checked safety results about the protocol’s control behavior. These claims
are about abstract protocol safety and state-machine behavior, not cryptographic soundness, implementa -
tion correctness, or hardware-faithful timing. Those claims must be addressed using separate tools. In the
concept-to-circuit path, TLA+ helps bridge the gap between a prose protocol and a precise behavioral model
whose safety properties can be exhaustively checked within the bounds of the model.
Hardware Translation
For the CRS, we elected to use FPGAs as the implementation substrate. Others might choose to close using
application-specific integrated circuits or custom silicon. Hardware description language is implementable
on an array of possible hardware, each with its own security considerations and supply chain risks. Engineers
are free to make trades of this kind as long as the choice fulfills SIDC security constraints. Note that the pre -
ceding tooling is applicable to human-operated systems and protocols (as in the hazard management system)
and to hardware design and implementation. Subsequent tools are more specific to the exemplar circuit-level
subsystem.
Synthesizable Hardware Specification: Bluespec SystemVerilog
Bluespec SystemVerilog (BSV) bridges the gap between a protocol specification and synthesizable hardware
by allowing designers to express circuit behavior as guarded atomic rules rather than as clock-by-clock regis-
ter transfers. This separates protocol correctness from implementation scheduling: Each rule defines a single
atomic state transition with an explicit guard condition, while the compiler handles scheduling and synthesis
to standard Verilog.
That rule-based structure has a direct correspondence to the abstract protocol models produced upstream,
preserving traceability from specification to circuit. The register-transfer–level (RTL) code that the compiler

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
36
produces then serves as the input to circuit-level formal verification. The claims BSV can support are struc -
tural rather than fully formal. Certain violations are prevented by construction because a rule cannot fire
unless its guard is satisfied, but BSV does not prove that guard conditions are correct or complete. That obli-
gation falls to the verification layer.
Inline Temporal Verification: SystemVerilog Assertions
SystemVerilog Assertions (SV A) operate at the layer where protocol requirements become verifiable claims
against the actual circuit, taking over where BSV’s structural guarantees end. SV A works directly on RTL
code and requires engineers to translate protocol requirements into temporal sequences. That translation
is itself a specification audit: Expressing requirements as falsifiable temporal predicates routinely surfaces
assumptions that the original specification left unstated.
SV A produces a layered artifact library: Assert property statements enforce safety invariants, cover prop -
erty statements confirm reachability, and assume property statements constrain the formal tool’s input space.
Its scope is the signal and cycle level. SV A cannot verify what was never asserted, so coverage is not complete-
ness, and system-level or probabilistic claims remain outside its reach. In the concept-to-circuit path, SV A is
the final formal link between requirements and circuit behavior for selected hardware mechanisms.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
37
Abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
BSV Bluespec SystemVerilog
CRS cross-realm solution
FPGA field-programmable gate array
GPU graphics processing unit
IR Interface Room
ITM Information Technology Management
MBSE model-based systems engineering
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
OC5 Operational Capacity 5
PER Payload Exchange Room
POC Protection Operations Center
RTL register-transfer level
SecDOP Security Design Order of Precedence
SIDC secure inference data center
SL5 Security Level 5
SP Special Publication
STIC Secure Transfer Inter-facility Conduit
STPA-Sec System-Theoretic Process Analysis for Security
S VA SystemVerilog Assertions
TICS Trusted Inference Compute Sanctum
TLA+ Temporal Logic of Actions+
TRV Trustworthy Recovery Vault

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
39
References
Becker, Briana, Gordon Griffin, and Susannah L. Gilmore, “Leasing SCIF Space: How the New ICD-705 Affects
Leases,” Holland & Knight, October 30, 2025.
Brass-Gershovich, Asher, Rachel Steratore, Wesley Hurd, Henry Alexander Bradley, Anjay Friedman, and Sella
Nevo, Securing AI Algorithmic Insights , RAND Corporation, RR-A4685-1, 2026. As of July 20, 2026:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA4685-1.html
Department of Defense Manual 5205.07, Special Access Program Security Manual , U.S. Department of Defense,
January 17, 2025.
Dohrwardt, Bray, “How Long Does It Take to Develop a Data Center? A Step-by-Step Timeline,” January 27,
2025.
Federal Investigations Notice No. 24-01, “Products and Services Reimbursable Billing Rates for FY 2025 and
FY 2026,” Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency, August 30, 2024.
Forrester Consulting, The Total Economic Impact of Checkmarx One: Cost Savings and Business Benefits Enabled
by the Checkmarx One Platform , March 2024a.
Forrester Consulting, The Total Economic Impact of the Veracode Application Risk Management Platform: Cost
Savings and Business Benefits Enabled by Veracode , August 2024b.
Forrester Consulting, The Total Economic Impact of Revenera: Cost Savings and Business Benefits Enabled by
Revenera, May 2025.
GCheck Editorial Team, “How Long Does a DoD Contractor Background Check Take? 2025 Timeline,” GCheck
blog, undated.
Green, Christine, “Estimating as an Art—What It Takes to Make Good Art,” paper presented at PMI Global
Congress 2006, Madrid, Spain, October 2006.
Hidalgo, Arlene, “Data Center Construction: Costs, Timeline, and Delivery Steps,” Mastt, last updated
February 20, 2026.
Hillman, Alexander P., A Systems-Theoretic Approach to Design of Early Concepts for Novel, Complex Systems in
Aerospace, dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, February 2025.
Intelligence Community Directive 705, Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities , Office of the Director of
National Intelligence, May 26, 2010.
Kyzer, Lindy, “How Long Does It Take to Get a Security Clearance? Times Go Up in 2024,” ClearanceJobs,
November 13, 2024.
Leutwyler, Alex, “Decoding SCIF Costs: What Drives the Price of Sensitive Compartmented Information
Facilities,” Emblem Builders blog, last updated October 18, 2025.
Leveson, Nancy G., Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking Applied to Safety , MIT Press, 2012.
Metras, Brian, and Tom Taylor, “Navigating the New Era of SCIF Construction,” Area Development, Q1 2025.
Nevo, Sella, Dan Lahav, Ajay Karpur, Yogev Bar-On, Henry Alexander Bradley, and Jeff Alstott, Securing AI
Model Weights: Preventing Theft and Misuse of Frontier Models , RAND Corporation, RR-A2849-1, 2024. As of
July 20, 2026:
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA2849-1.html
Patel, Dylan, and Daniel Nishball, “H100 vs GB200 NVL72 Training Benchmarks—Power, TCO, and Reliability
Analysis, Software Improvement over Time,” SemiAnalysis, August 20, 2025.
Ross, Ron, Mark Winstead, and Michael McEvilley, Engineering Trustworthy Secure Systems , National Institute
of Standards and Technology, NIST SP 800-160v1r1, November 2022.
SAE International, “Standard J3307_202503: System Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA) Standard for All
Industries,” March 24, 2025.
Simmins, Charles, “What Is a SCIF,” ClearanceJobs blog, April 1, 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Secure Inference Data Centers: A Vertically Integrated Strategy for Security Engineering
40
Ungles, Brian, John McWilliams, Ethan Tribble, Adrian Conforti, and Jason D’Orlando, Data Center
Development Cost Guide 2025, Cushman & Wakefield, 2025.
Vila, Didier, “Deconstructing the Data Center: A Look at the Cost Structure Igniting the AI Boom!” Alpha
Matica, undated.
Warfighting Acquisition University, “Cost Estimation Methods,” webpage, undated. As of February 19, 2026:
https://www.waru.edu/acquipedia-article/cost-estimation-methods
Young, William, and Nancy G. Leveson, “An Integrated Approach to Safety and Security Based on Systems
Theory,” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 57, No. 2, February 2014.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
41
About the Authors
Steven F. Comer is a senior AI security resident at RAND. His research improves security outcomes for high-
consequence software systems with tailored systems security engineering. Comer holds an M.S. in applied
computer science.
Hunter Pavela is a senior AI security resident at RAND, where he focuses on AI and cybersecurity. Pavela
holds an M.S. in cybersecurity.
Varun Gandhi is an AI security researcher at RAND. His work lies at the intersection of systems security,
cryptography, formal methods, and AI control, focusing on hardware-enforced isolation and cryptographic
verification mechanisms for secure and verifiable computation in advanced AI systems. Gandhi holds a
Ph.D. in computer science.
Kyle Siler-Evans is a senior engineer at RAND and a policy lead in the Center on AI, Security, and Technol -
ogy. His prior work focused on disaster management, infrastructure planning and resilience, cost analysis,
and decisionmaking under uncertainty. Siler-Evans holds a Ph.D. in engineering and public policy.
Erich Devendorf is a senior AI security resident at RAND. He conducts technical and policy research on AI
security, control, alignment, and evaluation. Devendorf holds a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering.
Ben Kelley was an AI security resident at RAND. He conducted technical and policy research on AI and
cybersecurity. Kelley holds an M.S. in cybersecurity and public policy.
James Gimbi is a senior AI security resident at RAND. He has a background in cyber crisis response, and his
research focuses on secure AI practice and policy. Gimbi holds a B.S. in information security.
Jair Aguirre is a senior information scientist at RAND. He conducts technical and policy research on offen -
sive cyber and spectrum operations, AI, and other emerging technology topics. Aguirre holds an M.S. in
applied economics.
Gabriel Kulp is adjunct staff at RAND, continuing work he pursued through the Technology and Security
Policy Fellowship. His research improves the security of frontier AI systems as they become more important
to national security and geopolitical stability. Kulp holds an M.S. in computer science.
Mark Stalczynski is a senior quantitative analyst at RAND. He undertakes research in public finance, budget
and cost analysis, and energy and the environment. Stalczynski has an M.S. in public policy and management.
Matthew J. Malone is a senior policy analyst at RAND, where he focuses on AI security and cybersecurity.
Malone holds an M.A. in security policy studies.
