
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Anthony Carroll and Jef Karel Caers
Artificial intelligence and the
future of African mining

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Led by Rama Y ade, previously an
ambassador and minister in the French
government, the Atlantic Council’s Africa
Center champions a new African narrative
prioritizing investment opportunities and
forward-looking partnerships. The center
promotes dynamic geopolitical partnerships
with African states, and the redirection of
US and European policy priorities toward
strengthening security and bolstering
economic growth and prosperity on the
continent.
Authors
Anthony Carroll and
Jef Karel Caers
Acknowledgments
The Atlantic Council
Critical Minerals Task
Force is grateful to Aiteo,
Rawbank, KoBold Metals,
Rio Tinto, and Managem
for their support of the
task force’s work, including
this report. This report
was written and published
in accordance with the
Atlantic Council’s policy on
intellectual independence,
which requires all donors
to agree to the Council
maintaining independent
control of the content and
conclusions of its work.
The authors are solely
responsible for its analysis
and recommendations.
Cover: A dump truck is seen at a mining pit
as commercial gold production begins at
the Newmont Ghana Gold Limited, Ahafo
North Mine, in Afrisipakromcommunity in
the Ahafo Region, Ghana. October 29,
2025. REUTERS/Francis Kokoroko
© 2026 The Atlantic Council of the United
States. All rights reserved. No part of
this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means
without permission in writing from the
Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief
quotations in news articles, critical articles,
or reviews.
Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1400 L Street NW, 11th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
2026
AFRICA CENTER
Atlantic Council

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Table of contents
Bottom lines up front ....................................................................................................................................2
Executive summary .......................................................................................................................................2
Introduction: Africa, critical minerals, and technology ...........................................................................3
Section 1: AI’s potential to transform mining from exploration to processing in Africa ...................6
1.1. Untangling disparate AI uses for mining applications ......................................................................6
1.2. Contemporary AI and data applications in global mining .............................................................. 7
1.3. Agentic AI and mining policy .................................................................................................................8
Section 2: Snapshot of AI use cases for mining in Africa ......................................................................9
2.1. AI-driven mineral exploration and deposit discovery ......................................................................9
2.2. AI uses in African mining operations ................................................................................................ 12
2.3. AI uses in African processing ............................................................................................................. 12
2.4. AI uses in traceability and supply chain transparency ..................................................................13
2.5. AI uses in policy modeling and supply chain resilience ...............................................................14
2.6. Challenges in uptake and uneven adoption ...................................................................................14
Section 3: Strategic and policy recommendations ................................................................................16
3.1. Building US government capacity and alliances for AI and mining ........................................... 16
3.2. Mobilizing capital for AI, digitalization, and mining adaptation ................................................. 16
3.3. Expand US bilateral, export, and diplomatic tools ........................................................................ 16
3.4. Supporting African governance, data sharing, and local expertise ...........................................17
3.5 Promote “skills-to-work” systems and local expertise ...................................................................17
Conclusion: An integrated agenda for smart mining in Africa ............................................................19
About the Authors ......................................................................................................................................20
Atlantic Council Board of Directors ..........................................................................................................21

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Africa stands at the nexus of geopolitical competition for crit -
ical materials that power the energy transition, defense, and
digital economies. Combined, Africa holds about one-third of
global critical mineral reserves. But it remains burdened by
colonial-era geological surveys and infrastructure and exports
its bounty largely unprocessed into Chinese-dominated sup -
ply chains. Middle powers like the United Arab Emirates (UAE)
have emerged as significant players in mining investment on
the continent, while the United States and its allies have sharp-
ened their interest in African mineral markets.1
This report highlights artificial intelligence (AI) and big data in -
novations and their applications for Africa’s mining sector. It
argues that AI and digitalization offer African states, the Unit -
ed States, and allied partners a strategic opportunity to move
beyond legacy constraints and one-sided partnerships in the
mining sector. AI and data applications in Africa can help expe-
dite discovery, reduce drilling time and modernize operations,
while de-risking investment and supporting policy modeling.
AI and data partnerships can potentially advance supply chain
transparency, strengthen local capacity across digital and ap -
plied sciences, and yield benefits for African communities.
1. Hubert Kinkoh, “The Governance of Natural Resources in Africa and the Role of the Gulf States,” Gulf Research Center, August
2024, https://www.grc.net/single-commentary/183; Moa Ringvall and Gunilla Reischl, “From Oil to Minerals: Gulf States as Middle
Powers in the Race for Critical Minerals,” Swedish Institute of International Affairs, February 2026, https://www.ui.se/globalassets/
ui.se-eng/publications/ui-publications/2026/ui-brief-no.-2-mar-2026.pdf.
As the United States is a leader in global AI, the US government
should leverage its expertise in new technologies, mapping,
and big data to develop partnerships with African countries
that advance US security objectives while providing long-term
dividends and economic development for African nations.
These efforts should be pursued as a single, integrated “smart
mining” agenda rather than as siloed AI and mining investment
tracks, so that these investments in African markets support
one another. This report also addresses uneven AI adoption
and persisting challenges for African economies in future min-
ing, including supply chain vulnerability to external shocks, in-
frastructure and governance gaps, and labor and skill needs.
A successful AI and digitalization transition for African mining
will involve concerted efforts to encourage targeted capital in
exploration and infrastructure development, US–Africa part -
nerships with cross-disciplinary staffing and expertise, and the
integration of local African expertise across mining ventures.
Executive summary
Bottom lines up front
Colonial-era maps and infrastructure hinder access to the roughly 30 percent of global critical minerals
in Africa.
AI-powered mining and mapping tools could help expedite discovery, reduce drilling time, and
modernize operations.
The US should develop “smart mining” partnerships with African countries that advance US security
objectives while providing long-term dividends for African nations.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
Mining has played a major role in Africa’s economic develop -
ment for millennia.2 There is evidence of the development of
sophisticated iron forging and smelting among the Nok people
of Nigeria dating from the sixth century and evidence of so -
phisticated subsurface mining in Zimbabwe and South Africa
from the eighth to eighteenth centuries. 3 Under colonial rule,
natural resource extraction by European powers provided lim-
ited social and economic dividends to the continent and hin -
dered the development of long-term infrastructure needed to
unlock the potential of African mining.4 The post-colonial peri-
od reproduced many of these trends, with mining agreements
mainly benefiting foreign businesses, rent-seeking political
elites, and companies reluctant to develop local human tech -
nical and managerial capacity or local supply chains. 5 African
countries often became reliant on a single export commodity
subject to global pricing fluctuations, while inflated prices for
capital and labor constrained the evolution of other economi -
cally competitive sectors.6
2. Legends of Africa’s wealth ranged from the mythology of King Solomon’s mines to the Three Wise Men who allegedly carried
(refined) gold, frankincense, and myrrh, possibly from Africa, to the infant Jesus in Bethlehem. In geopolitical history, a prominent
example was the Mali Empire under Mansa Musa in the fourteenth century, which exerted significant control over regional gold
resources and exports from West Africa through the Mediterranean.
3. Emma George Ross, “The Age of Iron in West Africa,” Metropolitan Museum of Art, October 1, 2002, https://www.metmuseum.org/
essays/the-age-of-iron-in-west-africa; A. Hammel, et al., “Pre-Colonial Mining in Southern Africa,” Journal of the Southern African
Institute of Mining and Metallurgy 100, 1 (2000), 49, https://www.saimm.co.za/Journal/v100n01p049.pdf.
4. The colonial period began the First Scramble for Africa, which saw the exploitation of Africa’s human and natural resources by
European nations vying for power, alongside businessmen like Cecil Rhodes dreaming of a privately owned Cape-to-Cairo rail
network, as well as King Leopold’s Congo Free State attempting to build its own private empire. Exported natural resources were
transported in raw, unprocessed form to the colonial powers via road, rail, and port networks, with little interest in sharing this
bounty with local communities. Thomas Pakenham, The Scramble for Africa: The White Man’s Conquest of the Dark Continent
from 1876 to 1912 (New Y ork: Random House, 1991); Robert I. Rotberg, The Founder: Cecil Rhodes and the Pursuit of Power (New
Y ork: Oxford University Press, 1988).
5. This was otherwise known as the “Resource Curse.” Richard M. Auty, Sustaining Development in Mineral Economies: The Re -
source Curse Thesis (London: Routledge, 1993).
6. Examples of dependence include bauxite in Guinea, copper in Zambia, oil in Nigeria, or diamonds in Botswana. This was otherwise
known as “Dutch Disease.” W. Max Corden and J. Peter Neary, “Booming Sector and De-Industrialisation in a Small Open Eco -
nomy,” Economic Journal 92, 368 (1982), 825–848, https://academic.oup.com/ej/article/92/368/825/5220457. During post-co -
lonial Africa’s first generation of leaders, efforts to develop cross-border infrastructure and supportive trade agreements often
proved futile despite calls for continental political and economic unity.
7. Gracelin Baskaran, “Underexplored and Undervalued: Addressing Africa’s Mineral Exploration Gap,” Center for Strategic and
International Studies, May 9, 2025, https://www.csis.org/analysis/underexplored-and-undervalued-addressing-africas-mineral-ex-
ploration-gap; Julia Baum and Marvellous Ngundu, “Africa Has Critical Minerals but Needs a Unified Strategy,” Institute for Security
Studies, May 22, 2025, https://futures.issafrica.org/blog/2025/Africa-has-critical-minerals-but-needs-a-unified-strategy.
8. Data from: “Mineral Commodity Summaries,” US Geological Survey, May 2026, https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2026/
mcs2026.pdf.
While Africa holds an estimated 30 percent of global crit -
ical mineral reserves, the continent remains vastly underex -
plored—and exploration is the oxygen of the mining industry.
Recent analysis reveals that, despite this mineral wealth, Afri -
ca receives only 10 percent of the global mineral exploration
budget and often relies on geologic surveys from the colo -
nial era.7 The 30 percent figure includes significant variation
across minerals. As Figure 1 shows, Africa’s known share of
global reserves ranges from nearly 90 percent of platinum
group metals down to approximately 2 percent of lithium.8 Be-
yond exploration, Africa has also seen little modernization in
mining practices and highly limited post-extraction processing.
The overarching constraint in most African countries remains
the lack of infrastructure required for expanded mineral explo-
ration, extraction, and processing.
Introduction: Africa, critical minerals, and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Today’s renewed competition over African resources is based
on the heightened demand for a supply of critical minerals pur-
sued by a new set of actors, principally China and Gulf powers
such as the UAE.9 Africa’s endowments of cobalt, manganese,
graphite, bauxite, copper, the platinum group of metals, and
tantalite-titanium-tin are of the very materials that fuel the bat -
tery storage, information technology, and defense industries.
Rare earth elements (REEs) often co-occur with these minerals
and metals and are thereby ripe for extraction. Across criti -
cal minerals and other natural resources, China has acquired
significant geological data for extraction and processing—and
has not shied away from wielding such dominance for geopo-
litical aims.
In response to this heightened demand, at least a dozen
African countries have begun implementing or planning a
spectrum of measures that restrict the export of unprocessed
9. The UAE has backed multibillion-dollar equity buyouts of tier-one extractive and processing assets on the continent, such as in
Zambia. The UAE has also signed an agreement for industrial-scale mine development in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Mechanisms for this influence in African mining include sovereign wealth funds and state-backed conglomerates. For
discussion on Abu Dhabi’s International Resources Holdings (IHR), other UAE entities, or the role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
see: Ringvall and Reischl, “From Oil to Minerals: Gulf States as Middle Powers in the Race for Critical Minerals”; Kinkoh, “The Go -
vernance of Natural Resources in Africa and the Role of the Gulf States.”
10. “DRC to Stockpile Critical Minerals with New Reserves,” Financial Times, April 15, 2026, https://www.ft.com/content/d0f19c7c-2f5c-
4865-a326-e4765bbcec58?syn-25a6b1a6.
natural resources. Several countries—such as Nigeria and
Zimbabwe (2022), Namibia (2023), and Gabon (2029)—have
imposed immediate or phased bans on the export of unpro -
cessed minerals. Meanwhile, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (DRC)—Africa’s “mother lode” of critical minerals—is
seeking to institute a stockpiling program to limit the pricing
practices imposed by countries with dominant market posi -
tions.10
Despite this, the deployment of technology for mining arrives
at a critical juncture, offering African countries and their part -
ners a means to capture more value from these resources
without resorting to export bans. Indeed, this late adoption
of technological breakthroughs could be turned to an advan -
tage. Cutting-edge exploration technologies using advanced
geologic data analysis, predictive modeling, and geospatial
information can expedite discovery—possibly beyond the 30
Fig. 1: Africa’s share of selected global critical mineral reserves
Percent of World Reserves, 2025
Source: US Geological Survey. Data from Mineral Commodity Summaries 2026.
Platinum-Group metals
Cobalt
Manganese
Chromium
Bauxite
Graphite (natural)
Copper
Lithium
0% 60%20% 80%40%
36.7%
50.8%
84.6%
34.8%
25.5%
10.30%
2.4%
22.6%

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
percent estimate cited above. Extraction technologies can
also be more efficient and less disruptive, providing higher
returns and lower social costs. Processing is becoming more
nimble and able to be deployed closer to mineral reserves,
providing an opportunity for Africa to extract more value from
its mineral bounty.
Globally, mineral exploration has traditionally been a costly,
low-success-rate endeavor. Approximately 0.5 percent (or five
of every thousand) of early-stage prospects have led to com -
mercially viable outcomes, while exploration, permitting, and
construction processes can last more than ten years. 11 McK-
insey estimates that data and AI-driven smart mining could
save producers $290–390 billion per year by 2035. 12 Such
11. “Improving Mineral Exploration,” Burgex, October 8, 2021, https://www.burgex.com/2021/10/08/improving-mineral-exploration; Ka-
ren Roberts, “Sustainable Mineral Supply,” University of Delaware, March 15, 2017, https://www.udel.edu/udaily/2017/march/sustai-
nable-mineral-supply.
12. Jovana Trivan and Srđan Kostić, “Smart Mining: Joint Model for Parametrization of Coal Excavation Process Based on Artificial
Neural Networks,” Archives for T echnical Sciences 2, 29 (2023), 11–12, https://arhivzatehnickenauke.com/article/274.
13. “BHP and Microsoft Use AI to Lift Escondida Copper Recovery,” BHP, press release, May 30, 2023, https://www.bhp.com/news/
media-centre/releases/2023/05/bhp-and-microsoft-use-ai-to-lift-escondida-copper-recovery; “World-First Automated Trains De -
ployed at Rio Tinto’s Iron Ore Operations,” Rio Tinto, press release, December 28, 2018, https://www.riotinto.com/en/news/re -
leases/2018/world-first-autonomous-trains-deployed.
14. “Critical Materials: Action Needed to Implement Requirements That Reduce Supply Chain Risks,” US Government Accountability
Office, September 10, 2024, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-24-107176.pdf.
opportunities are already proven outside of Africa. Examples
include AI and machine learning uses in optimizing copper re-
covery in Chile or autonomous systems that streamline mining
logistics in Australia. 13
In Africa, these advances can reduce not only geologic and
processing risks but also political risk, making the mining sec-
tor more attractive for investment. As US and global markets
increasingly require verified, geopolitically secure supply
chains, AI and data technologies could offer new tools for
traceability, helping African nations boost the value of their
critical mineral resources.14
Fig. 2 China’s dominance in critical mineral refining
Selected minerals, percent of global refining capacity
Source: International Energy Agency. Data from “Global Critical Minerals Outlook 2025,” May 21, 2025; “Critical Minerals Dataset,” last updated
2025.
Graphite
Manganese
Cobalt
Rare earth elements (REEs)
Lithium
Copper
Chromium
0% 60%20% 80%40% 100%
96%
95%
77%
76%
70%
45%
42%

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
1.1. Untangling disparate AI uses for mining
applications
The convergence of AI, big data analytics, and digital transfor-
mation has been reshaping the global mining industry, from
exploration to mine operations to processing. While often
used as an umbrella term, AI encompasses a rapidly evolv -
ing landscape of sub-disciplines and methodologies—includ -
ing data science, unsupervised learning, machine learning,
deep learning, computer vision, autonomous systems, large
language models (LLMs), and agentic AI—used to varying
degrees across mining applications, as illustrated in Table 1
below. These tools can be broadly divided into two main cate-
gories of functionality.
 y Predictive and analytical AI : Systems that ingest vast
amounts of data to generate predictions or forecasts
based on those data. Examples include machine learn-
ing, deep learning (neural networks), generative AI (e.g.,
LLMs), and computer vision.
 y Acting and autonomous AI: AI that acts and makes de-
cisions in the real world or in digital environments, such
as robots or AI agents. The table below provides an
overview of both functionalities, in mining and beyond.
Section 1: AI’s potential to transform mining from explo-
ration to processing in Africa
Table 1: AI functionality and applications in the mining value chain.
Mining phase Predictive and analytical AI Acting and autonomous AI
Exploration
Example outside mining:
Weather prediction.
Example in mining:
Predicting mineral potential over a region
using geophysical and geological data.
Example outside mining:
An agent that writes software.
Example in mining:
An agent that sequentially plans
exploration drilling.
Operations
Example outside mining:
Diagnosing cancer in medical images.
Example in mining:
Predicting the grade on a mining face
using hyperspectral imaging.
Example outside mining:
Self-driving cars.
Example in mining:
Autonomous vehicles in a mine.
Processing
Example outside mining:
A chatbot that answers questions.
Example in mining:
Predicting froth flotation performance
from video capture data.
Example outside mining:
Weather prediction.
Example in mining:
Automated management of mineral processing
circuits under variable feedback.
Rather than making discoveries without human involvement or
displacing geological fieldwork, AI can support, augment, and
enhance decision-making about which data to acquire, how to
plan a mine while accounting for safety risks, or how to reduce
waste in mineral processing.15 Increased AI use can potential -
ly mean better integration of human expertise in exploration,
15. Litshedzani Mutele and Emmanuel John M. Carranza, “A Modulated Mineral Prospectivity Mapping of Orogenic Gold Minerali -
zation, Pietersburg Greenstone Belt, South Africa: Exploration Targeting from a Mineral Systems Approach,” Natural Resources
Research 35, 2 (2025), 877–900, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11053-025-10595-7.
mining operations, and processing with data-driven tools and
computational techniques that were not possible a decade
ago. Research has shown that big data-driven exploration and
subsurface monitoring can reduce exploratory drilling time by
75–80 percent, while AI-supported predictive maintenance
can improve operational efficiency by reducing equipment

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
downtime by up to 50 percent and costs by 10–40 percent. 16
These statistics are aggregated globally and not specific to
Africa.
1.2. Contemporary AI and data applications in
global mining
AI and big data capabilities are evolving at a rapid pace across
developed mining geographies worldwide. These include
Canada, a leading country for AI-led greenfield exploration for
minerals such as lithium, copper, cobalt, and REEs.17 Across op-
erations, Australia has been a leader in autonomous, AI-driv -
en logistics and robotics application in mining (including truck
16. John Mern and Jef Caers, “The Intelligent Prospector v1.0: Geoscientific Model Development and Prediction by Sequential Data
Acquisition Planning with Application to Mineral Exploration,” Geoscientific Model Development 16, 1 (2023), 289–313, https://gmd.
copernicus.org/articles/16/289/2023; Wasiu Oyediran Adedeji, et al., “AI-Driven Smart Factories: From Predictive Maintenance to
Autonomous Production Systems,” Faculty of Natural and Applied Sciences Journal of Computing and Applications 2, 4 (2025),
87–94, https://www.fnasjournals.com/index.php/FNAS-JCA/article/view/1078; Sabine Dall’Omo, “Unearthing AI’s Real Value in Afri-
can Mining,” Mail and Guardian, February 11, 2026, https://mg.co.za/thought-leader/opinion/2026-02-11-unearthing-ais-real-value-
in-african-mining.
17. “Canada and the Northwest Territories Partner on Innovative, AI-Based Core Scanning Initiative to Support Critical Minerals
Development,” Natural Resources Canada, press release, July 14, 2025, https://www.canada.ca/en/natural-resources-canada/
news/2025/07/canada-and-the-northwest-territories-partner-on-innovative-ai-based-core-scanning-initiative-to-support-criti -
cal-minerals-development.html.
18. Rio Tinto is a supporter of the Atlantic Council’s Critical Minerals Task Force. This report is a product of the task force.
and train networks), while Chile has seen advances in machine
learning for processing and metallurgy and digital twins for op-
timizing copper extraction. Key examples include the BHP–Mi-
crosoft partnership at Escondida Mine in Chile, using machine
learning and cloud computing for copper recovery, while
complementing the site’s separate advances in bioleaching.
Meanwhile, Rio Tinto’s AutoHaul at Pilbara, Australia, uses
computer vision and autonomous AI to operate the world’s
largest automated rail network.18 Chile’s state-owned Codelco
reported that its machine learning-powered digital data center
added approximately eight thousand metric tons of copper to
its annual yield at Chuquicamata, meaning an additional $80
ASTER image from the Escondida open-pit mine in Chile’s Atacama Desert. Source: NASA.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
million in annual earnings. 19 As these examples demonstrate,
AI and applied data science tools help tackle problems—from
exploration to mining operations and processing—that require
integrating diverse components and disciplines. 20 Worldwide,
leading mining companies harnessing AI and data technology
for mining purposes include BHP, Rio Tinto, Anglo American,
Codelco, Freeport-McMoRan, Glencore, and KoBold Metals.21
1.3. Agentic AI and mining policy
Forward-looking AI is evolving rapidly, including agentic AI—
combining predictive and acting functionalities—with poten -
tial promise for policy modeling and development in mining.
While LLMs were useful for researching information or writing
reports in 2025, newer versions of models and interfaces (e.g.,
Anthropic’s Claude) can be equipped with reasoning and can
execute tasks on a computer when given access. AI is at an
inflection point, particularly in its capacity to reason from in -
formation provided in specific documents, write code, upload
input data, and run that code to produce complex and quanti-
tative answers rather than the summaries that 2025 LLMs pro-
duced.22 This shift has important and yet untapped potential
for mining globally.
Although mapping remains a challenge in much of Africa,
many governments hold non-digitized data on a century or
19. Ewa Manthey, “How AI Can Help Speed up the Energy Transition,” Think, February 26, 2024, https://think.ing.com/articles/how-ai-
can-speed-up-green-energy-transition.
20. “BHP and Microsoft Use AI to Lift Escondida Copper Recovery”; “World-First Automated Trains Deployed at Rio Tinto’s Iron Ore
Operations.”
21. KoBold Metals is a supporter of the Atlantic Council’s Critical Minerals Task Force. This report is a product of the task force. Beyond
leading mining operators, key actors include innovation accelerators such as Creative Destruction Lab (CDL) and BHP’s Xplor pro-
gram. Other notable actors include research organizations such as Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO). The following section will highlight emerging players on the African continent, including specialized AI and
data technology companies.
22. Rogé Karma, “So, About That AI Bubble,” Atlantic, May 1, 2026, https://www.theatlantic.com/economy/2026/05/ai-bubble-reve -
nue-anthropic/687022.
23. Glen T. Nwaila, et al., “Mineral Reconnaissance through Scientific Consensus: First National Prospectivity Maps for PGE–Ni–Cu–Cr
and Witwatersrand-Type Au Deposits in South Africa,” Natural Resources Research 33, 6 (2024), 2357–2384, https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s11053-024-10390-w.
24. “GSD Store,” Zambian Geological Survey Department, last visited June 5, 2026, https://gsd.gov.zm/search.
25. Agentic AI involves LLMs that can be equipped with specific skills (e.g., the open-source LangChain). An LLM can read a microe -
conomics textbook, implement models in Python code, and execute that code with data supplied in tables to the AI—work that
would have previously required significant software engineering.
26. Mutele and Carranza, “A Modulated Mineral Prospectivity Mapping of Orogenic Gold Mineralization, Pietersburg Greenstone Belt,
South Africa.”
more of exploration and mining activities.23 Some of this infor-
mation is structured (e.g., tables, maps), while other data are
unstructured (e.g., mining codes, geological reports). The Zam-
bian Geological Survey Department web portal offers a nota -
ble example of digitized mapping and the importance of public
data for mining and policy modeling. 24 As governments look
to improve data and digital baselines, they are interested in
evaluating the effects of mining policy on supply chain dynam-
ics and revenue forecasting, whether for internal regulation or
setting royalties and export controls. Traditionally, answering
such questions would require significant expertise across dig-
itization, computer science, microeconomics and macroeco -
nomics, law, and other fields. Through agentic AI, much of this
can be achieved today through prompting, allowing analysts
to ask, for example, what would happen if “country X” imposed
an export control on “mineral Y.”25
At the same time, digitization and accurate mapping of mineral
resources remain vital to generating the kind of granular data
needed to run such models. Equipped with more comprehen-
sive data and digital mapping systems, African governments
could bypass traditional software engineering and the expert
systems of the last fifty years, leveraging cutting-edge technol-
ogy to develop customized solutions themselves.26

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
Section 2: Snapshot of AI use cases for mining in Africa
27. Meanwhile, the United States remains the global leader in AI and big data, though not specifically in terms of their use in mining
applications. For discussion of the United States and mining, see: Helene Nguemgaing and Alan Collins, “The Missing Link in
Critical Minerals Push Isn’t Mining—It’s Processing Expertise,” Conversation, May 11, 2026, https://theconversation.com/the-mis -
sing-link-in-americas-critical-minerals-push-isnt-mining-its-processing-expertise-281002.
28. “Mineral-X,” Stanford University, last visited May 11, 2026, https://mineralx.stanford.edu.
29. Jef K. Caers, “The Future of AI in Critical Mineral Exploration,” Sustainable Earth Resources Communications 1, 2 (2025), 69–82,
https://serc.yandypress.com/index.php/3104-977X/article/view/121; Max Bearak, “A.I. Needs Copper. It Just Helped to Find Millions
of Tons of It,” New Y ork Times, July 11, 2024, https://let.iiec.unam.mx/node/5348.
30. “BHP Xplor,” BHP, last visited June 3, 2026, https://www.bhp.com/about/our-businesses/xplor. Through this Xplor program, BHP is
backing tech-forward companies such as Mineural and Orion Minerals, which use AI platforms to help with exploration including
in South Africa’s Northern Cape region.
31. Mern and Caers, “The Intelligent Prospector v1.0.”
32. Muflih Hidayat, “Tsodilo UCT Rare Earth Skarn Exploration Advances in Botswana,” Discovery Alert, May 4, 2026, https://discove-
ryalert.com.au/rare-earth-exploration-botswana-skarn-gcwihaba-tsodilo-uct.
33. “AI-Powered Mineral Exploration,” Terra AI, last visited June 3, 2026, https://www.terraai.com/minerals.
Across Africa, AI tools are evolving from theory to practice in
key areas of the mining chain, ranging from predictive geo -
logical modeling to autonomous operations. However, the
adoption environment remains fragmented, with applications
centered in Southern Africa and isolated model examples else-
where on the continent. In Africa, notable AI breakthroughs in
exploration, mining operations, and extraction remain in ear -
ly stages of development, with processing the next frontier.
While African countries feature some high-profile cases, the
continent is a more nascent theater for AI deployment than
more established theaters of AI and big data applications in
mining, such as Australia, Canada, and Chile.27
2.1. AI-driven mineral exploration and deposit
discovery
The most visible breakthroughs in Africa have come in explora-
tion. KoBold Metals—a US-based, AI-enabled exploration and
mining firm—has used machine learning models trained on
geophysical, geochemical, and legacy survey data to identify
high-probability deposits of cobalt, copper, and lithium across
the DRC and Zambia. AI was used to plan drilling, reducing
drilling cost and time in the Mingomba project on the Zambi -
an Copperbelt.28 This case concerns a brownfield discovery
in which reanalysis of nearby drilling indicated the potential
for additional copper mineralization. Geologists and data sci -
entists reanalyzed existing data, generating new hypotheses
regarding the extent of mineralization through automated
three-dimensional modeling of the geological structures. The
AI proposed an optimal drilling sequence to reduce uncertain-
ty on the grade and volumes of ore quickly. 29 The Mingomba
discovery illustrates how AI-driven exploration methodology
can help develop technically complex deposits. Other major
mining companies such as Rio Tinto and BHP are also using
AI to plan and optimize drilling—notably in South Africa.30 Sim-
ulations based on aggregated global data indicate that these
AI models have the potential to cut exploration drilling time by
up to 75 percent.31
Similar high-profile approaches are being piloted in both Na -
mibia and Botswana. A key example is the partnership be -
tween Battelle Laboratories, Tsodilo Resources, and the Uni -
versity of Cape Town (UCT), which uses automated mineralogy
data to characterize complex rare earth deposits and identify
mineral phases at microscopic scale. 32 Firms such as Terra AI
and Earth AI have shown how proprietary AI models can nar -
row drilling targets and de-risk early-stage exploration—tradi -
tionally the higher-risk and most capital-intensive phase of the
project life cycle.33
While AI innovations can reduce costs for mining firms, they
are also attractive from a policy perspective. African govern -
ments are increasingly partnering with technology companies;
an example is Zambia’s partnership with Xcalibur for whole-of-
country mapping, with full commercial release to be launched
in 2027. This, in turn, attracts investments from new players. As
AI requires data to improve planning and exploration, African
countries’ support for digital mapping is essential to generate
the kinds of data needed for AI applications in exploration.
AI-driven exploration advances in Africa are undergirded by
innovations in remote sensing, geospatial tools, and mapping
applications. Firms are now integrating hyperspectral imaging
and drone surveys with data from the ASTER and Sentinel-2
satellite missions to enable deep-learning probability mapping
at continental scale. Firms such as TerraEye, XRTech, and Xcal-
ibur have been deploying these tools across emerging mining
hubs in Africa, providing big data-driven geological insights

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
and mineral mapping with a fraction of the time and cost need-
ed for traditional ground surveys. 34 Xcalibur Smart Mapping
uses multiphysics airborne data acquired from specialized air-
craft fleets to offer subsurface information on natural resourc -
es and critical minerals at the country level, including in Ango-
la, DRC, Nigeria, Uganda, and Zambia.35 The company reports
having flown more than fifty million linear kilometers globally
with more than forty aircraft. These new technological appli -
cations can be especially valuable when combined with local
drilling data or geological fieldwork to determine hotspots for
detailed exploration. AI advances in these areas help address
a critical gap—Africa’s lack of public geoscience datasets and
mapping—by supporting vital information flows and capacity
needed for mineral exploration.
34. Sunena Gupta, “Rock Solid AI: How Digital Tools Are Unearthing a New Era of Mining Exploration,” CleanTech Group, July 7, 2025,
https://cleantech.com/rock-solid-ai-how-digital-tools-are-unearthing-a-new-era-of-mining-exploration; “Satellite Gold Exploration:
Mapping & Detection,” XRTech Group, 2026, https://xrtechgroup.com/satellite-gold-exploration-mapping-detection.
35. “Country Mapping Programme,” Xcalibur, last visited May 21, 2026, https://xcaliburmp.com/country-mapping-programme; “Xcalibur
Smart Mapping, in Collaboration with the Zambian Presidency, Has Officially Commenced Its Nationwide High-Resolution Aerial
Geophysical Survey,” Zambian Geological Survey Department and Xcalibur, press release, November 2024, https://xcaliburmp.
com/tag/zambia.
36. Darin Christensen, et al., “Estimating the Footprint of Artisanal Mining in Africa,” National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2025,
https://www.nber.org/papers/w33646.
While mining has historically been slow to adopt new tech -
nologies, AI and digitalization could help African countries re -
verse past economic distortions and improve the information
environment by generating precise data for contract negoti -
ations, revenue forecasting, regulatory oversight, policy, and
infrastructure planning. The prevalence of artisanal and small-
scale mining (ASM) in Africa also offers significant potential to
shape data flows and increase productivity.36
Source: Terra AI.
Fig 3. Example of Terra AI’s use of multimodal AI models to narrow drilling targets on an example copper porphyry model.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
Sources goes here
Country Mapping programme | Case Study
CCHHAALLLLEENNGGEE RREESSUULLTTSS
SSOOLLUUTTIIOONN
Angola's mining and exploration potential has traditionally been
linked to diamonds and oil & gas.
However, a lack of up-to-date geological data historically led to
investor uncertainty.
Xcalibur Smart Mapping, in collaboration with the Government of
Angola, implemented a Geophysical and Geological Mapping
Program between 2015 and 2021, as part of Angola's National
Geology Plan (PLANAGEO)
Several low resolution (1 KM line spacing) magnetic and
radiometric flyovers were performed providing critical information
about Angola's mineral resources
Major relevant geological structures were discovered, and
for the first time in 40 years, major mining companies (Rio
Tinto, Anglo American, Ivanhoe Mines) decided to invest in
Angola out of oil & gas and diamonds.
This case study illustrates the potential of geophysical and geological mapping, using magnetic and radiometric flyovers to provide information
on Angola’s mineral resources. This mapping was a collaboration between Xcalibur and the government of Angola as part of Angola’s National
Geology Plan. Source: Xcalibur Smart Mapping.
This map illustrates high-confidence hotspots of mining activity (red and orange) and possible disturbances requiring validation (dark red), com-
pared to vegetated, natural, or agricultural states (green). The AI model quantifies the spatial extent of mining expansion and clusters of new
activity for regulatory review, and estimates affected hectares. Source: Xcalibur XENAI (Earth intelligence framework).
Fig 5. Example of Xcalibur’s XENAI platform and change-detection mapping, examining artisanal mining expansion in a selected area of
Kaduna, Nigeria, from 2018 to 2025.
Fig 4. Xcalibur country mapping of Angola.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
To foster long-term participation by communities in mining ven-
tures, AI and data-driven exploration must be informed by local
knowledge and accompanied by investments in African work-
forces. Local institutions including ASM and labor groups, tra -
ditional authorities, and geologists have significant insight into
their countries’ environments and a granular understanding of
localized opportunities or challenges that trained AI models
cannot replicate. African and US universities also play a vital
role in advancing technical know-how in data science and new
technologies.37 Smart mining partnerships that integrate African
expertise into model design will deliver more politically durable
and commercially viable outcomes than foreign partnerships
that view African contexts as simple extraction sites for raw
materials and data. Engaging local specialists and supporting
workforces can help make investments in African exploration
and mining ventures more credible and efficient in the long run.
2.2. AI uses in African mining operations
In the context of operating mines, AI applications cluster around
safety, automation, and predictive maintenance. Computer vi -
sion systems are being deployed across South Africa’s platinum
belt to monitor worker proximity to heavy equipment and detect
rockfall and related risks.38 Automation and remote operations
have advanced furthest at Resolute’s Syama gold mine in Ma-
li.39 Predictive models are being used to optimize blasting and
ore body modeling in Zambia, while digital twins are emerging
in South Africa as a tool for whole-of-mine planning—including
detecting danger and adapting operations in challenging phys-
37. Examples include the University of Cape Town, Colorado School of Mines, and Hudson Valley Community College, with further
discussion in Section 3.
38. “African Mining Accelerates Adoption of Artificial Intelligence,” Cape Business News, March 17, 2026, https://www.cbn.co.za/indus-
try-news/mining/african-mining-accelerates-adoption-of-artificial-intelligence; Shane Cooper, “AI in African Mining Stuck between
Promise and Constraints,” African Mining, March 3, 2026, https://www.africanmining.co.za/2026/03/03/ai-in-african-mining-stuck-
between-promise-and-constraints.
39. Landry Signé, “Digitalizing Africa’s mines,” Brookings, December 3, 2021, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/digitalizing-afri -
cas-mines. “Syama,” Resolute Mining, last visited July 1, 2026, https://www.rml.com.au/assets/syama-mali.
40. “Fleet Space Partners with CopperTech Metals & Axiom Group to Deploy Agile Geoscience in Zambia,” Fleet Space, February 12,
2026, https://www.fleetspace.com/newsroom/fleet-space-partners-with-coppertech-metals-axiom-group-to-deploy-agile-geos -
cience-in-zambia; Johan Coetzee, “Digital Innovations Reshaping the Future of Mining in Africa,” Engineering News, February 10,
2026, https://www.engineeringnews.co.za/article/digital-innovations-reshaping-the-future-of-mining-in-africa-2026-02-10-1.
41. “South Africa in 2040: Pictures of Transformation,” Siemens, 2024, https://assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/api/
uuid:1d7403ba-4414-4f99-8ccf-84f60a0b1063/PicturefTransformationZA.pdf; Dall’Omo, “Unearthing AI’s Real Value in African Mi -
ning.”
42. Ideon partners include BHP and Rio Tinto. “About,” Ideon Technologies, last visited May 11, 2026, https://ideon.ai/about; “Ideon and
Rio Tinto Global Partnership Applies Next-Generation Subsurface Intelligence to Reduce Cost and Accelerate Critical Minerals
Supply,” Ideon Technologies, press release, last visited May 15, 2026, https://ideon.ai/post/2025/10/06/ideon-and-rio-tinto-glo -
bal-partnership-applies-next-generation-subsurface-intelligence-to-reduce-cost-and-accelerate-critical-minerals-supply.
43. “Welcome to Mintek,” Mintek, last visited June 23, 2026, https://mintek.co.za; Agit Singh, Jurgens Louw, and Dave Hulbert, “Flota-
tion, Stabilization, and Optimization,” Journal of the South African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, November 2003, https://www.
saimm.co.za/Journal/v103n09p581.pdf.
44. “AI Drives Mining Efficiency in Africa,” Finance News Network, April 22, 2025, https://www.finnewsnetwork.com.au/archives/fi -
nance_news_network1422175.html.
45. “ProProcess Engineering Starts Commissioning Modular Fines Flotation Plant for Anglo American Platinum,” International Mi -
ning, August 24, 2021, https://im-mining.com/2021/08/24/proprocess-engineering-starts-commissioning-modular-fines-flota -
tion-plant-anglo-american-platinum
ical terrain.40 According to Siemens, up to 40 percent of South
African mines are expected to use digital twins by 2040.41 Com-
bining new sensing technologies with AI might revolutionize
block cave mining; for example, Ideon Technologies’ REVEAL
platform for subsurface mapping and four-dimensional monitor-
ing may hold the potential to reduce drilling by up to 80 percent,
although the evidence of its applications in African markets re-
mains inchoate.42
2.3. AI uses in African processing
AI is also deployed in processing, the next frontier in maximiz-
ing mineral yield, with notable examples in South Africa’s mining
sector. Tech innovations have been historically driven by do -
mestic innovation hubs like Mintek, with advanced process con-
trol systems such as FloatStar and FrothStar to stabilize complex
flotation circuits in platinum concentrators across South Africa’s
Bushveld complex.43 More recent advances include Kilken Plat-
inum’s use of AI-driven monitoring at the Thabazimbi tailings
retreatment plant to track production metrics in real time and
optimize platinum group metal (PGM) recovery, with the goal of
doubling monthly PGM output from a baseline of 40 kilograms
(kg) to 83 kg.44 Major mining operators are also integrating digi-
tal twins in platinum processing. Anglo American’s Mogalakwe-
na mine uses data-driven models to optimize coarse particle
recovery—allowing for larger grind sizes and improved water
efficiency—while using a new modular fines flotation pilot plant
to capture ultra-fine platinum group metals.45

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
Beyond South Africa, downstream processing has advanced
significantly at Ivanhoe’s Kamoa-Kakula copper complex in the
DRC. Using data analytics to optimize copper recovery, the
complex targeted a 95 percent recovery rate, supported by
the production of approximately 400,000 metric tons of cop -
per in 2025, and established a new on-site smelter that now
produces sulfuric acid at scale.46
2.4. AI uses in traceability and supply chain
transparency
End users in global markets and regulators—e.g., the Europe -
an Union, Japan, and the United States—are increasingly con-
cerned with verified sourcing. The US Defense Federal Acqui-
sition Regulation Supplement, for example, restricts defense
contractors from sourcing strategic materials such as cobalt,
tantalum, and REEs from geopolitical adversaries, prioritiz -
46. “Kamua-Kakola Copper Studies for Improving Recovery from Tailings,” Engineering and Mining Journal, September 2023, https://
www.e-mj.com/departments/processing-solutions/kamoa-kakula-copper-studies-options-for-improving-recovery-from-tailings.
47. “Critical Materials: Action Needed to Implement Requirements That Reduce Supply Chain Risks.”
48. “Blockchain Technology and Diamond Traceability: Tracr,” De Beers Group, 2024, https://www.debeersgroup.com/about-us/
case-studies/2024/tracr.
49. “Circulor Achieves First-Ever-Mine-to-Manufacturer Traceability of a Conflict Mineral with Hyperledger Fabric,” Hyperledger 2018,
https://www.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/hubfs/Hyperledger/Printables/Hyperledger_CaseStudy_Tantalum_Print.pdf; “Policy Brief As-
sessment of Rwanda’s Potential in AI and Innovation,” United Nations Development Programme, April 8, 2026, https://www.undp.
org/rwanda/publications/policy-brief-assessment-rwandas-potential-ai-and-innovation.
ing verified African supply chains. 47 On the continent, AI and
blockchain integrations are being piloted to verify source ma -
terials across the mining value chain. Tracr, a platform modeled
on diamond traceability, uses secure scanning and matching
to create a unique “digital fingerprint” for each stone, facilitat -
ing verification across international borders. 48 In the tantalum
sector, Circulor uses AI-enhanced blockchain systems to trace
high-risk conflict minerals. In Rwanda, for example, the plat -
form utilizes the biometric facial recognition platform URU to
verify the identity of artisanal miners and track the dynamic
mass balance of ore, helping to prevent the blending of illicit
materials into certified global supply chains.49
Transparent data sharing can also help to bridge the trust
deficits between multinational firms, governments, and local
communities. For example, the same predictive analytics that
optimize ore recovery can also map and reduce risks tied to
UK Foreign Secretary James Cleverly visits Mimbula Copper Mine in Ndola, Zambia, 2023. Source: UK government.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
community grievances, labor disputes, water contamination,
health risks, and other environmental, social, and governance
(ESG) hazards. This is relevant in ASM zones where formal
monitoring is limited, such as in Guinea, the DRC, or Nigeria.50
Frameworks for community-owned data, in which ASM coop -
eratives could be compensated for the data they generate
for AI applications, could be explored to help better balance
commercial AI demand with local economic development, as
transparency helps build the consent and trust needed for du-
rable foreign mining ventures.5152
2.5. AI uses in policy modeling and supply
chain resilience
With respect to current operational challenges, AI-based de -
sign of facilities and engineering systems has the capacity to
address a range of problems, such as the availability and pro-
duction of sulfuric acid, the cornerstone of mineral extraction
and processing. Sulfuric acid offers a concrete example of how
“systems thinking” AI could help mining operators and govern-
ments in Africa assess risks and opportunities with respect to
local and global critical minerals supply chains. As outlined in
50. Jeffrey Fralick, “App Will Track Harmful Dust from Bauxite Mining in Guinea,” State of the Planet, Columbia Climate School, July 17,
2020, https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2020/07/17/app-dust-bauxite-mining-guinea.
51. Chris Huggins, “Is Collaboration Possible Between the Small-Scale and Large-Scale Mining Sectors? Evidence from ‘Conflict-Free
Mining’ in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC),” Extractive Industries and Society 13, 443 (2022), https://www.sciencedi -
rect.com/science/article/pii/S2214790X22001356?via%3Dihub; “AI Governance in Africa: Case Studies on Data Sovereignty,” Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, April 30, 2026, https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/oecd-artificial-in -
telligence-case-studies_c517fcf5-en/ai-governance-in-africa_1ff55135-en.html.
52. Muflih Hidayat, “Turning South Africa’s Coal Waste Into Sulfuric Acid Production,” Discovery Alert, May 6, 2026, https://discove -
ryalert.com.au/south-africa-coal-waste-sulphuric-acid-production-pyrite.
53. “Evidence-Based Research on the Impact of New Technologies in the Mining Industry,” Intergovernmental Forum on Mining,
Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development, December 2025, https://www.iisd.org/system/files/2025-12/new-technologies-mi-
ning-impact.pdf.
Section 1, agentic AI’s ability to evaluate policy can be applied
to critical bottlenecks, such as the sourcing of sulfuric acid.
2.6. Challenges in uptake and uneven adop-
tion
Despite these innovations, AI use cases in Africa remain dis -
connected and adoption is highly concentrated. While digital
mapping and data-driven exploration offer promising exam -
ples, some technologies—such as full automation—remain in
early stages on the continent, in contrast to advances in Aus -
tralia.53 Geographic disparities across mining contexts are also
clear, with applications mainly concentrated in Southern Africa.
Meanwhile adoption is lagging in other mining hubs such as
West and Central Africa, where infrastructure deficits, security
risks, and transport and logistics constraints hamper corporate
investments in AI-driven mineral exploration, extraction, and
processing. Beyond shortages of public and digital data, struc-
tural challenges for African mining include the limited number
of power grids, road and rail networks, deep-water ports, and
chemical plants needed for advanced extraction and process-
ing, as well as persisting gaps in public and private financing
CASE STUDY
Sulfuric acid, traditionally sourced from oil and gas extraction, is subject to geopolitical challenges and disruptions
(e.g., the closure of the Strait of Hormuz). The alternative is to source sulfuric acid from processing pyrite (FeS2,),
otherwise known as “fool’s gold,” which is abundant in many African deposits. While producing sulfuric acid locally
would solve several problems at once, the challenge lies in designing processing facilities that are economically
viable and optimized for the variability of pyrite feedstock. While there are promising alternatives and substitutes
for sulfuric acid, significant uncertainty persists regarding their viability and required production scale. For corporate
investors—in AI, automotive, or mining industries—or government policymakers, it remains unclear where to focus
their efforts or what the optimal balance is between continuing traditional sourcing from oil and gas and pursuing
alternative methods. Because agentic AI is a technology that can combine subject matter expertise with data to solve
complex planning problems, such technology can run scenarios on the viability of substitution or local sourcing ac -
counting quantitatively for geological, economic, and geopolitical uncertainty, thereby reducing the guessing game of
resource investment. The same technology is well suited to planning sulfuric acid extraction from processing waste
with variable feedstock in Africa.52

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
for power infrastructure. 54 Approximately 600 million people,
nearly 40 percent of Africa’s population, lack access to base -
line electricity. The high cost of power in much of Africa ren -
ders energy-intensive AI applications and data centers partic -
ularly challenging, despite advances and clustering in South
Africa or new opportunities in Ethiopia or Kenya. 55 In the long
run, infrastructure investments are key to supporting mineral
extraction and processing on the continent, along with the
data flows and digital architecture required for a modernized,
tech-enabled mining sector.
54. “Financing Electricity Access in Africa,” International Energy Agency, 2026 https://www.iea.org/reports/financing-electricity-ac -
cess-in-africa/executive-summary.
55. “Financing Electricity Access in Africa”; “Energy and AI,” International Energy Agency, April 2025, https://www.iea.org/reports/
energy-and-ai; Roger B. Jantio, “How Will Africa Make Use of AI? Two Visions for the Continent’s Tech Future,” D+C Develop -
ment and Cooperation, March 31, 2026, https://www.dandc.eu/en/article/africa–artificial-intelligence–leapfrogging–economy–
two-visions; Ede Ijjasz-Vasquez, Landry Signe, and Vera Songwe, “Unlocking Africa’s Critical Minerals for Broad-Based Prosperity
and Global Competitiveness,” Brookings, January 14, 2026, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/unlocking-africas-critical-mine -
rals-for-broad-based-prosperity-and-global-competitiveness. Despite opportunities for tapping into lower-cost energy for data
center development, such as in Ethiopia, these facilities would require greater integration in regional markets to be viable. The
AfCFTA Protocol on Digital Trade provides a useful framework but regulatory fragmentation continues to impede the free flow
of computing services across borders. See the AfCFTA and its relevant annexes on emerging technologies. African countries
combined hold an estimated $4.1 trillion in domestic institutional capital. These resources can help spur energy development
and digital infrastructure needed for an AI-driven mining sector. Emmanuel Ebube, “Africa Has $4 Trillion in Capital but Struggles
to Deploy It into Infrastructure,” African Economy Inc., April 23, 2026, https://africaneconomyinc.com/finance/africa-has-4-trillion-
in-capital-but-struggles-to-deploy-it-into-infrastructure-afc-says; “African Leaders Champion Sovereign Data to Strengthen Eco -
nomic Security and Continental Integration,” UN Economic Commission for Africa, April 3, 2026, https://www.uneca.org/stories/
african-leaders-champion-sovereign-data-to-strengthen-economic-security-and-continental.
Fig 6. Africa’s data center power footprint
Installed capacity (GW)
Data source: International Energy Agency
Total installed capacity (GW) 2024
World 97
North America 43
 United States 42
Central and South America 0.4
Europe 16
Africa 0.4
Middle East 0.4
Asia Pacific 36
 China 24

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Section 3: Strategic and policy recommendations
56. Aubrey Hruby, “The Millenium Challenge Corporation Is Needed for Peace in the Great Lakes Region–and US Mineral Security,”
Atlantic Council, November 4, 2025, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/africasource/the-millennium-challenge-corporation-is-
needed-for-peace-in-the-great-lakes-region-and-us-mineral-security.
57. As a founding member of the Pax Silica coalition, Japan provides a model through JOGMEC, which acts as state-backed capital
for mineral supply chains as strategic infrastructure. “Strengthening Relations with African Countries through the 9th Tokyo Inter -
national Conference on African Development (TICAD9),” Japan Organization for Metals and Energy Security, September 9, 2025,
https://www.jogmec.go.jp/english/news/release/release_00425.html.
58. “World Bank Group to Double Guarantees for Africa to Catalyze Investment, Create Jobs,” Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency, May 19, 2026, https://www.miga.org/press-release/world-bank-group-double-guarantees-africa-catalyze-investment-
create-jobs.
Nevertheless, AI and digitalization continue to offer African
countries and their partners means to understand and report
on existing mineral resources, streamline operations, and cap-
ture greater value from critical minerals. Technological appli -
cations in African mining should also be deployed alongside
investments in complementary sectors—notably infrastructure,
governance, geosciences, and digital education—while build-
ing upon local expertise and supporting capacity building in
mining geographies.
3.1. Building US government capacity and
alliances for AI and mining
Expedite cross-disciplinary staffing. Relevant US agencies—
including the State Department, Commerce Department, US
International Development Finance Corporation (DFC), US
Trade and Development Agency (USTDA), and US Geological
Survey (USGS)—should hire specialists bridging AI and data
science, business development, and African policy, rather than
treating AI and mining as separate competencies. The State
Department can use Interagency Agreements (IAA) or Partici -
pating Agency Service Agreements to support the establish -
ment of new roles in agencies, explicitly designating these
roles as critical to achieve US strategic objectives. While US
agencies already provide support for AI and mining in Africa,
including grants and de-risking tools, they should be empow -
ered to rapidly expand their technical capability to help fast-
track decision-making and unleash funding given the urgency
of critical mineral markets. The Millennium Challenge Corpora-
tion’s new support model for critical minerals corridors—which
combines investments in infrastructure, energy, digital innova-
tion, and new technology—provides a useful approach for risk
sharing with African countries while integrating data, tech, and
infrastructure projects to modernize logistics and secure min -
eral transport routes.56
Leverage allied capital and capacity . Under the newly
launched Forum on Resource Geostrategic Engagement
(FORGE), which replaced the Minerals Security Partnership in
early 2026, the State Department should co-fund smart mining
ventures with Quad allies that have deep institutional ties in
Africa, such as Japan. The State Department can deploy Pax
Silica funds with the Japan Organization for Metals and Ener -
gy Security (JOGMEC) to combine US strengths in AI and big
data with Japan’s established networks in African geological
training and geoscientific capacity building. 57 This collabora -
tion in digital technology and AI for African mining would com-
plement investments in transport and energy corridors by the
Group of Seven (G7) Partnership for Global Infrastructure and
Investment (PGII).
3.2. Mobilizing capital for AI, digitalization,
and mining adaptation
Establish a tech and mining adaptation fund . The DFC
should fund a $300 million public-private smart mining vehi -
cle, modeled on the Orion Critical Mineral Consortium and
managed by a specialized private entity. This platform would
de-risk AI and data-driven projects in African mining and pro -
vide risk-mitigating tools to encourage venture capital invest -
ment in African tech startups across exploration, operations,
and processing. Fund eligibility should prioritize capital-light
AI solutions in resource-constrained, limited infrastructure en -
vironments. With respect to risk mitigation, the World Bank’s
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) provides
political risk insurance, currency conversion, and other guar -
antees that can help those backing tech and mining projects
in higher-risk countries.58
Finance local production of mining chemicals. The DFC and
the USTDA should develop grants for feasibility studies on
optimizing production of mining chemicals in Africa, such as
sulfuric acid derived from pyrite waste. This approach would
address African reliance on costly imports shipped through
geopolitical chokepoints and help develop infrastructure that
would underpin long-term US investments in African mineral
extraction and processing.
3.3. Expand US bilateral, export, and diploma-
tic tools
Pair mapping projects with data sharing. The USTDA should
tailor grants for feasibility studies in mapping, pairing US firms
with African counterparts to map mineral assets and supply
chain infrastructure. In exchange for USGS technical assis -
tance to modernize African mapping capacity, partner gov -
ernments would share geological data with the United States

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
and FORGE countries through secure channels. 59 To alleviate
concerns that newly generated data could benefit US compet-
itors, the United States and allied partners might explore a joint
mechanism with African partners to develop sovereign data
enclaves where geological data would be cryptographically
restricted.
Showcase US AI at African mining industry events and con-
ferences. The US Commerce Department should use its AI ex-
port programs to highlight the evolution of US AI and data tools
at major mining convenings in Africa. This can be achieved
through devoted sessions that focus on how AI can address
local demands, in-country operations, and processing.
Offer sequenced alternatives to export bans. Where export
ban policies are under consideration, the US government
(through the State and Commerce Departments) can advise
African governments to consider sequenced alternatives such
as proportional increases in local processing requirements
over five-year periods. This would give both governments and
foreign operators time to adapt while encouraging investment
in midstream processing.
3.4. Supporting African governance, data sha-
ring, and local expertise
Make mining a pillar of AI policies and streamline AI in
mining governance . African governments should designate
mining and critical minerals as explicit pillars within national
AI strategies. 60 African mining ministries should appoint AI
technology officers to report to ministers, helping these min -
istries better understand AI uses through data science exper -
tise. Ministers should establish African Union (AU)-aligned,
open data frameworks for public datasets and mapping, while
more sensitive information can be shared through licensing
agreements or data trusts. 61 Regional think tanks such as the
59. This support could entail a greater focus on AI applications in geospatial and remote sensing. “EU and US Launch Strategic
Partnership on Critical Minerals,” European Commission, press release, April 23, 2026, https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscor-
ner/detail/en/ip_26_862; “Africa’s Green Minerals Strategy.”
60. Stafford Masie, “SA Risks Missing Critical Global AI Window through Well-Intentioned Policy Misalignment,” Daily Maverick, April
19, 2026, https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2026-04-19-sa-risks-missing-critical-global-ai-window-through-well-intentioned-
policy-misalignment.
61. “Africa’s Green Minerals Strategy”; “African Minerals Development Centre: About,” African Union, last visited May 11, 2026, https://
au.int/en/amdc; “African Green Minerals Observatory,” African Minerals Development Centre, last visited July 1, 2026, https://www.
africangreenminerals.com.
62. “African Green Minerals Observatory.” The SAIIA already provides vital support to the AU’s African Minerals Development Centre
and related bodies for capacity building and information sharing.
63. Recent examples illustrate a focus on AI uses for health, telemedicine, governance, and education, among other areas. Segun
Adeyemi, “Rwanda Emerges as Africa’s First AI Scaling Hub with 17.5 Million Funding Boost,” Business Insider, October 20, 2025,
https://africa.businessinsider.com/local/markets/rwanda-emerges-as-africas-first-ai-scaling-hub-with-dollar175-million-funding-
boost/vse0x52.
64. Such domestic institutional capital includes SWFs. While US and international vehicles can fund capital-light AI software for mining
uses, scaling these innovations also requires improvements in baseline power and digital networks. Beyond traditional hydro and
solar, governments should also explore emerging renewables such as geothermal, wind, and river-harnessed energy. “African
Leaders Champion Sovereign Data to Strengthen Economic Security and Continental Integration”; Ebube, “Africa Has $4 Trillion in
Capital but Struggles to Deploy It into Infrastructure.”
65. For example, Botswana and Angola’s SWFs have recently aligned to purchase Anglo American’s equity in DeBeers.
South African Institute of International Affairs and US universi -
ties should co-convene an AU Green Minerals Strategy Annex
focused on AI, data sharing, and African capacity in digitaliza -
tion and smart mining. 62 Meanwhile, leading tech companies
should ensure that AI-related grants to African economies in -
clude specific provisions for data uses and digitalization of the
mining sector across exploration, operations and processing.63
Mobilize domestic capital . African governments should tap
into domestic capital such as sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) to
finance infrastructure to spur an adaptive, tech-enabled min -
ing sector, including data centers and renewable energy proj-
ects.64 Good examples include Morocco’s Ithmar Capital, with
significant investments in pan-African infrastructure and green
energy projects, and Rwanda’s Agaciro Development Fund,
which is eyeing power grid and data center development
domestically. African SWFs are even more important in light
of funding disruptions to infrastructure resulting from the Iran
conflict and the UAE’s role as one of the largest investors in Af-
rica.65 The African Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA)
Protocol on Digital Trade and its annexes should be used to
facilitate free access to computing services across borders.
3.5 Promote “skills-to-work” systems and local
expertise
Empower African industry, labor, and research. US firms, na-
tional labs, and universities should expand partnerships with
African institutions to establish research hubs and training
curricula focused on AI for mining. Capacity building should
prioritize data science, mapping, and digital infrastructure
management to showcase the US competitive advantage in
these areas compared to China’s traditional support for geolo-
gy departments in Africa. Best practice examples include New-
mont (Ghana), and Battelle Laboratories (Botswana–Namibia,

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
South Africa).66 US colleges such as Colorado School of Mines
or Hudson Valley Community College should expand African
partnerships to offer students practical courses and credits in
AI, digital science, business analytics, and technology across
the mining chain. 67 Meanwhile, the Pentagon’s new Econom -
ic Defense Unit should consider funding US national labs to
invest in AI and digital technologies that can be deployed at
scale in exploration, mining operations, and processing in Af -
rica.68 Across mining geographies, US national labs can sup -
port new technology applications in partnership with leading
African institutions such as Morocco’s University Mohamed VI
Polytechnic (UM6P) or South Africa’s Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR).69
66. Innovations like the Colorado School of Mines’ new critical minerals facility can transfer expertise and help scale academic tools
into industrial applications. Multisectoral partnerships such as the Battelle–Tsodilo–UCT initiative can advance AI-driven explo -
ration using local geological expertise, while building in-country and regional capacity. Hidayat, “Tsodilo UCT Rare Earth Skarn
Exploration Advances in Botswana.”
67. “Foundations of Artificial Intelligence (Microcredential),” Hudson Valley Community College, last visited May 11, 2026, https://www.
hvcc.edu/programs/microcredentials/offerings/foundations-of-artificial-intelligence.html.
68. Kate O’Keeffe, “Pentagon’s ‘Deal Team Six’ Takes Aim at China’s Rare Earth Power,” Bloomberg, May 14, 2026, https://news.bgov.
com/bloomberg-government-news/pentagons-deal-team-six-takes-aim-at-chinas-rare-earth-power.
69. UM6P features campuses in both Morocco and New Y ork City, making it a promising venue for US–African research collaboration
in AI and technology for mining uses. Other relevant African universities include South Africa’s Center Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR) based in Pretoria, and DRC’s University of Lumbubashi.
Embed community-focused expertise . US mining operators
and partner tech firms should increase their recruitment of lo -
cal geologists, environmental experts, and community liaison
advisers when deploying AI applications in African exploration
and established mining areas. Leveraging human capital, local
data, and know-how helps improve AI modeling and perfor -
mance, such as by integrating local perspectives on drilling
opportunities and challenges. This also allows for better fore -
casting of safety and hazard risks, and addressing possible
grievances over land, labor disputes, water contamination,
and other ESG concerns. In ASM areas, smart mining ventures
could explore community frameworks for compensating ASM
cooperatives for the data they generate for AI applications.
Doing so would help strengthen foreign operators’ compli -
ance with local laws and customs, and advance community
relations and local buy-in in exploratory stages, operations,
and future mining hubs.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
19
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
Conclusion: An integrated agenda for smart mining in
Africa
As the global scramble for critical minerals intensifies, there
is a clear opportunity to leverage cutting-edge technology to
build more transparent, efficient, and resilient supply chains—
in Africa and beyond—that will define the geopolitics of the
coming decades. The deployment of AI and big data tools in
African mining offers clear promises and opportunities, with
notable advances in mineral exploration and digital mapping.
Illustrative cases of tech advances in operations and process-
ing are clustered in the more developed mining contexts of
Southern Africa, highlighting patterns of uneven adoption and
geographical disparities on the continent. This report demon -
strates that the path to capturing greater value from critical
minerals, securing supply chains, and fostering durable eco -
nomic growth will require moving beyond legacy extraction
models and siloed foreign investments in AI and mining.
The United States and its strategic partners should embrace
a cohesive strategy that integrates technological innovation
with local African capacity and infrastructure development to
strengthen energy access and modernize logistics corridors.
Only then can African nations, the United States, and US allies
transform mining on the continent from a low-tech commodity
enterprise into a data-driven engine of growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Artificial intelligence and the future of African mining
20
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Anthony Carroll, esquire, is an international affairs consultant with five decades of experience as an investor, philanthropist,
and thought leader in Africa. He is a co-founder and executive board member of Mining Indaba and also serves on the board of
ReElement Technologies. He has held fellowships with the Center for Strategic and International Studies and the Carnegie En -
dowment for International Peace, and served as an adjunct professor of African Studies at the Johns Hopkins University School
of Advanced International Studies. He also served in the Peace Corps in Botswana.
Jef Karel Caers, PhD, is professor of Earth and planetary sciences at Stanford University. His research focuses on decision-mak-
ing under uncertainty, critical mineral supply chains, and the transition to renewable energy. He has published in journals cov -
ering mathematics, statistics, Earth sciences, engineering, and computer science. He is the founder of Mineral-X, a communi -
ty-building effort developing technological innovations and new pathways in the mineral supply chain, from upstream exploration
to processing. Mineral-X is funded in part by KoBold Metals, Ideon, Fleet Space, and Xcalibur Smart Mapping, all of which are
mentioned in the report.
The authors thank Archibald Henry, independent expert on African affairs, and David Zhen Yin, co-founder of Stanford Mineral-X,
for research support and contributions to the report.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
A next-generation agenda: Bridging Indo-Pacific and European perspectives on securityBoard of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stephen Achilles
Elliot Ackerman
*Gina F. Adams
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
Alain Bejjani
Colleen Bell
Sarah E. Beshar
*Karan Bhatia
Stephen Biegun
Linden P. Blue
Brad Bondi
John Bonsell
Philip M. Breedlove
David L. Caplan
Samantha A. Carl-Y oder
*Teresa Carlson
*James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
*Helima Croft
Ankit N. Desai
*Lawrence Di Rita
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Richard Edelman
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Tara Engel
Mark T. Esper
Christopher W.K. Fetzer
*Michael Fisch
Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
*Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
Sherri W. Goodman
Marcel Grisnigt
Jarosław Grzesiak
Murathan Günal
Michael V. Hayden
Robin Hayes
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Kay Bailey Hutchison
Ian Ihnatowycz
Deborah Lee James
*Joia M. Johnson
*Safi Kalo
Karen Karniol-Tambour
*Andre Kelleners
John E. Klein
Ratko Knežević
C. Jeffrey Knittel
Joseph Konzelmann
Keith J. Krach
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Almar Latour
Y ann Le Pallec
Diane Leopold
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Roger R. Martella Jr.
Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Majida Mourad
Mary Claire Murphy
Julia Nesheiwat
Edward J. Newberry
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
*Ahmet M. Ören
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
David H. Petraeus
Elizabeth Frost Pierson
*Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
Robert Portman
*Dina H. Powell
 McCormick
Michael Punke
Ashraf Qazi
Laura J. Richardson
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Wendy R. Sherman
Gregg Sherrill
Jeff Shockey
Kris Singh
Varun Sivaram
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
Nader Tavakoli
*Gil Tenzer
*Frances F. Townsend
Melanne Verveer
Tyson Voelkel
Kemba Walden
Michael F. Walsh
*Peter Weinberg
Ronald Weiser
*Al Williams
Ben Wilson
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
Tod D. Wolters
*Jenny Wood
Alan Y ang
Guang Y ang
Mary C. Y ates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY
DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster

*Executive Committee Members
List as of March 24, 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that promotes
constructive US leadership and engagement in international
 affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic community in
 meeting today’s global challenges.
© 2026 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights re -
served. No part of this publication may be reproduced or trans -
mitted in any form or by any means without permission in writing
from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of brief quotations in
news articles, critical articles, or reviews. Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1400 L Street NW, 11th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226
www.AtlanticCouncil.org
