
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Policy Brief
Report No. 69/2023
Jamie Gaida, Jennifer Wong-Leung, Stephan Robin and Danielle Cave
ASPI’s Critical 
Technology Tracker
The global race for future power
Home About He/t9/t11 Contact
© 2022 ASPI, Inc. All rights r eserv ed. Disclaimer Priv acy policy
Who is leading the 
critical technol ogy ra ce?
Compar e Quad countries 4 against China in Quantum computing Ex pl ore the d a t a
or expl ore b y critical technol ogy
?

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the authors
Dr Jamie Gaida is a senior analyst, project manager and data scientist with ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre.
Dr Jennifer Wong-Leung is a data scientist with ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre.
Stephan Robin is a researcher with ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre.
Danielle Cave is Director – Executive, Strategy & Research at ASPI.
Acknowledgements
Thank you to ASPI colleagues (past, current and future) for their reviews of, and contributions to, this report including Fergus Hanson, 
Jocelinn Kang, Alex Caples, Daria Impiombato, Justin Bassi and Bronte Munro. Thank you to external peer reviewers including Alex Capri, 
Simeon Gilding, Daniel Bongiorno, James McNeill, Alistair Campbell, Will Moreland, Rick Switzer and anonymous reviewers. 
Funding for this project came from the US State Department’s Global Engagement Center and a grant from The Special Competitive 
Studies Project . A previous project on critical technologies funded by Australia’s Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet in 2021 
helped to inform the direction of this much larger and more in-depth research project. Thank you also to Australia’s Defence Science 
and Technology Group for sharing material that helped inform the development and build of our own database search strategies. Future 
phases of this work are being planned.
What is ASPI?
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute was formed in 2001 as an independent, non -partisan think tank. Its core aim is to provide the 
Australian Government with fresh ideas on Australia’s defence, security and strategic policy choices. ASPI is responsible for informing the 
public on a range of strategic issues, generating new thinking for government and harnessing strategic thinking internationally. ASPI’s 
sources of funding are identified in our annual report, online at www.aspi.org.au and in the acknowledgements section of individual 
publications. ASPI remains independent in the content of the research and in all editorial judgements.
ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre (ICPC) is a leading voice in global debates on cyber, emerging and critical technologies and 
issues related to information and foreign interference and focuses on the impact those issues have on broader strategic policy. The 
centre has a growing mixture of expertise and skills, including teams of researchers who concentrate on policy, technical analysis, 
information operations and disinformation, critical and emerging technologies, cyber capacity-building, satellite analysis, surveillance 
and China-related issues. The ICPC informs public debate in the Indo-Pacific region and supports public policy development by producing 
original, empirical, data-driven research. The centre enriches regional debates by collaborating with research institutes from around 
the world and by bringing leading global experts to Australia, including through fellowships. To develop capability in Australia and the 
Indo-Pacific region, the ICPC has a capacity-building team that conducts workshops, training programs and large-scale exercises for the 
public and private sectors. We thank all of those who support and contribute to the ICPC with their time, intellect and passion for the 
topics we work on. If you would like to support the work of the centre, contact: icpc@aspi.org.au .
Important disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in relation to the subject matter covered. It is provided with 
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering any form of professional or other advice or services. No person should 
rely on the contents of this publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional.
ASPI
Tel Canberra: +61 2 6270 5100 
Tel Washington DC: +1 202 414 7353 
Email enquiries@aspi.org.au 
www.aspi.org.au 
www.aspistrategist.org.au 
 facebook.com/ASPI.org 
 @ASPI_ICPC
© The Australian Strategic Policy Institute Limited 2023.
This publication is subject to copyright. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 , no part of it may in any form or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, microcopying, photocopying, recording or otherwise) be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
without prior written permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the publishers. Notwithstanding the above, educational institutions 
(including schools, independent colleges, universities and TAFEs) are granted permission to make copies of copyrighted works strictly for 
educational purposes without explicit permission from ASPI and free of charge.
First published February 2023. ISSN 2209-9689 (online). ISSN 2209-9670 (print).
Cover image: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker website homepage.
Funding for this report was provided 
by the US State Department and 
The Special Competitive Studies Project.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Policy Brief
Report No. 69/2023
Jamie Gaida, Jennifer Wong-Leung, Stephan Robin and Danielle Cave
ASPI’s Critical 
Technology Tracker
The global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
What’s the problem? 1
What’s the solution? 2
What is ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker? 3
Executive summary 4
Why research is vital for scientific and technological advancements 9
Methodology in brief 10
China’s science and technology vision 14
China’s breakout research capabilities in defence, security and intelligence technologies 16
Technology deep dives 20
Policy recommendations 44
Appendix 1.1: Top 5 country visual snapshot 51
Appendix 1.2: One-page visual snapshot 56
Appendix 2: Detailed methodology 57
Appendix 3: Database search hits 65
Appendix 4: Flags 67
Notes 68
Acronyms and abbreviations 77
Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
What’s the problem?
Western democracies are losing the global technological competition, including the race for scientific 
and research breakthroughs, and the ability to retain global talent—crucial ingredients that underpin 
the development and control of the world’s most important technologies, including those that don’t 
yet exist.
Our research reveals that China has built the foundations to position itself as the world’s leading 
science and technology superpower, by establishing a sometimes stunning lead in high-impact 
research across the majority of critical and emerging technology domains. China’s global lead extends 
to 37 out of 44 technologies that ASPI is now tracking, covering a range of crucial technology fields 
spanning defence, space, robotics, energy, the environment, biotechnology, artificial intelligence (AI), 
advanced materials and key quantum technology areas.1 The Critical Technology Tracker shows that, 
for some technologies, all of the world’s top 10 leading research institutions are based in China and are 
collectively generating nine times more high-impact research papers than the second-ranked country 
(most often the US). Notably, the Chinese Academy of Sciences ranks highly (and often first or second) 
across many of the 44 technologies included in the Critical Technology Tracker. We also see China’s 
efforts being bolstered through talent and knowledge import: one-fifth of its high-impact papers are 
being authored by researchers with postgraduate training in a Five-Eyes country.2 China’s lead is the 
product of deliberate design and long-term policy planning, as repeatedly outlined by Xi Jinping and 
his predecessors.3
A key area in which China excels is defence- and space-related technologies. China’s strides in 
nuclear-capable hypersonic missiles reportedly took US intelligence by surprise in August 2021.4 
Had a tool such as ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker been collecting and analysing this data two 
years ago, Beijing’s strong interest and leading research performance in this area would have been 
more easily identified, and such technological advances would have been less surprising. That’s 
because, according to our data analysis, over the past five years, China generated 48.49% of the 
world’s high-impact research papers into advanced aircraft engines, including hypersonics, and it 
hosts seven of the world’s top 10 research institutions in this topic area. 
The US comes second in the majority of the 44 technologies examined in the Critical Technology 
Tracker. The US currently leads in areas such as high performance computing, quantum computing 
and vaccines. Our dataset reveals that there’s a large gap between China and the US, as the leading 
two countries, and everyone else. The data then indicates a small, second-tier group of countries led 
by India and the UK: other countries that regularly appear in this group—in many technological fields—
include South Korea, Germany, Australia, Italy, and less often, Japan.
This project—including some of its more surprising findings—further highlights the gap in our 
understanding of the critical technology ecosystem, including its current trajectory. It’s important 
that we seek to fill this gap so we don’t face a future in which one or two countries dominate new and 
emerging industries (something that recently occurred in 5G technologies) and so countries have 
ongoing access to trusted and secure critical technology supply chains. 
China’s overall research lead, and its dominant concentration of expertise across a range of strategic 
sectors, has short and long term implications for democratic nations. In the long term, China’s leading 
1

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
research position means that it has set itself up to excel not just in current technological development 
in almost all sectors, but in future technologies that don’t yet exist. Unchecked, this could shift not 
just technological development and control but global power and influence to an authoritarian state 
where the development, testing and application of emerging, critical and military technologies isn’t 
open and transparent and where it can’t be scrutinised by independent civil society and media.
In the more immediate term, that lead—coupled with successful strategies for translating research 
breakthroughs to commercial systems and products that are fed into an efficient manufacturing 
base—could allow China to gain a stranglehold on the global supply of certain critical technologies. 
Such risks are exacerbated because of the willingness of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to use 
coercive techniques5 outside of the global rules-based order to punish governments and businesses, 
including withholding the supply of critical technologies.6
What’s the solution?
These findings should be a wake-up call for democratic nations, who must rapidly pursue a strategic 
critical technology step-up. Governments around the world should work both collaboratively and 
individually to catch up to China and, more broadly, they must pay greater attention to the world’s 
centre of technological innovation and strategic competition: the Indo-Pacific. While China is in front, 
it’s important for democracies to take stock of the power of their potential aggregate lead and the 
collective strengths of regions and groupings (for example the EU, the Quad and AUKUS, to name just 
a few examples). But such aggregate leads will only be fully realised through far deeper collaboration 
between partners and allies, greater investment in areas including R&D, talent and commercialisation, 
and more focused intelligence strategies. And, finally, governments must make more space for new, 
bigger and more creative policy ideas - the step-up in performance required demands no less.
Partners and allies need to step up and seriously consider things such as sovereign wealth funds at 
0.5%–0.7% of gross national income providing venture capital, research and scale-up funding, with 
a sizable portion reserved for high-risk, high-reward ‘moonshots’ (big ideas). Governments should 
plan for:
• technology visas, ‘friend-shoring’ and R&D grants between allies
• a revitalisation of the university sector through specialised scholarships for students and 
technologists working at the forefront of critical technology research
• restructuring taxation systems to divert private capital towards venture capital and scale-up efforts 
for promising new technologies
• new public–private partnerships and centres of excellence to help to foster greater 
commercialisation opportunities.
Intelligence communities have a pivotal role to play in both informing decision-makers and building 
capability. One recommendation we make is that Five-Eyes countries, along with Japan, build an 
intelligence analytical centre focused on China and technology (starting with open-source intelligence).
We outline 23 policy recommendations for partners and allies to act on collaboratively and individually. 
They span across the four themes of investment and talent; global partnerships; intelligence; and 
moonshots. While China is in front, it’s important for democracies to take stock of their combined and 
complementary strengths. When added up, they have the aggregate lead in many technology areas.
2 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
What is ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker?
ASPI’s new Critical Technology Tracker website (https://techtracker.aspi.org.au/) provides the public 
with a rich new dataset that allows users to track 44 technologies foundational for our economies, 
societies, national security, energy production, health and climate security. Both the website and 
this report provide decision-makers with a new evidence base to make more informed policy and 
investment decisions. A list of these 44 technologies, including definitions, can be found here.
This effort goes further than previous attempts to benchmark research output across nations by 
focusing on individual institutions and technologies, identified as being critical and emerging, rather 
than focusing on total research output. Technology definitions can be found on the website.7 This 
report is broken into key sections:
Methodology: We provide an explanation of why tracking high-impact research is a useful measure 
of where countries, universities and companies are excelling. We explain our methodology in detail 
and provide ‘deep dives’ into our dataset to explore three major fields: AI, quantum technologies and 
advanced materials. 
Analysis: This research focuses on a key performance measure of scientific and technological 
capability—high-impact research—and reveals where countries, universities and companies around 
the world have a competitive advantage in this measure across the 44 technologies. The talent tracker 
also examines other metrics to reveal the flow of global talent in these technologies and to highlight 
brain gains and brain drains for each country. Our analysis of the dataset also helps policymakers 
understand where the concentration of research expertise is most extreme and could threaten future 
access to key technologies.
Visual Snapshot: Readers looking for a visual summary of the top-5 ranked countries (see example 
below) in each of the 44 technology areas can jump to Appendixes 1.1 and 1.2. Appendix 4 is a table of 
flags and the countries that they represent.
Technology Top 5 countries
Vaccines and medical 
countermeasures
28.31%
 12.57%
 6.18%
 6.06%
 5.14%
Advanced aircraft engines 
(incl. hypersonics)
48.49%
 11.69%
 6.96%
 3.93%
 3.60%
Given China’s strengths in so many of these technologies, this report unpacks elements of China’s lead, 
including by examining China’s breakout research capabilities in defence, security and intelligence 
technologies, along with the long-term policy and planning efforts that underpinned this outcome.
Recommendations: The report provides 23 policy recommendations geared towards closing the 
critical technologies research gap.
ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker website contains an enormous amount of original data and analysis, 
and we encourage readers to visit the site and explore the data as they engage with this report. ASPI 
aims for the tracker to be used by policymakers, businesses, researchers and media. We’ll continue to 
build and improve this program of work over the coming years, including by adding more technologies 
and possibly more features.
3

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Executive summary
Critical technologies already underpin the global economy and our society. From the energy-efficient 
microprocessors in smartphones to the security that enables online banking and shopping, 
these technologies are ubiquitous and essential. They’re unlocking green energy production and 
supporting medical breakthroughs. They’re also the basis for military capability on the battlefield, 
are underpinning new hybrid warfare techniques and can give intelligence agencies a major edge 
over adversaries.
Just a few years ago, a nation could focus its research, resource extraction and manufacturing energies 
toward its strengths with the assurance that international supply chains would provide the balance 
of required goods. That world has gone, swept away by Covid-19, geopolitics and changes in global 
supply chains. Countries have also shown a willingness to withhold supplies of critical materials as 
a weapon of economic coercion, and an energy crisis is gripping much of the world as a result of the 
Russian invasion of Ukraine.
This report, and the Critical Technology Tracker website, fill a global gap by identifying which countries, 
universities and businesses are leading the effort to progress scientific and research innovation, 
including breakthroughs, in critical technologies. Database queries identified the relevant set of 
papers for each technology (2.2 million in total; see our method in brief on page 10 and in detail in 
Appendix 2).8 The top 10% most highly cited research publications from the past five years on each 
of the 44 technologies were analysed. In addition, our work collecting and analysing data on the 
flow of researchers between countries at various career stages—undergraduate, postgraduate and 
employment—identifies brain drains and brain gains in each technology area. See below talent flow 
graphic that illustrates the global competition for research talent across these 44 technologies.
4 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
China is further ahead in more areas than has been realised. It’s the leading country in 37 of the 
44 technologies evaluated, often producing more than five times as much high-impact research as its 
closest competitor. This means that only seven of the 44 analysed technologies are currently led by a 
democratic country, and that country in all instances is the US.
The US maintains its strengths in the design and development of advanced semiconductor devices 
and leads in the research fields of high performance computing and advanced integrated circuit design 
and fabrication. It’s also in front in the crucial areas of quantum computing and vaccines (and medical 
countermeasures). This is consistent with analysis showing that the US holds the most Covid-19 
vaccine patents and sits at the centre of this global collaboration network.9 Medical countermeasures 
provide protection (and post-exposure management) for military and civilian people against 
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear material by providing rapid field-based diagnostics and 
therapeutics (such as antiviral medications) in addition to vaccines.10
The race to be the next most important technological powerhouse is a close one between the UK and 
India, both of which claim a place in the top five countries in 29 of the 44 technologies. South Korea 
and Germany follow closely behind, appearing in the top five countries in 20 and 17 technologies, 
respectively. Australia is in the top five for nine technologies, followed closely by Italy (seven 
technologies), Iran (six), Japan (four) and Canada (four). Russia, Singapore, Saudi Arabia, France, 
Malaysia and the Netherlands are in the top five for one or two technologies. A number of other 
countries, including Spain and Turkey, regularly make the top 10 countries but aren’t in the top five.
As well as tracking which countries are in front, the Critical Technology Tracker highlights which 
organisations—universities, companies and labs—are leading in which technologies. For example, 
the Netherlands’ Delft University of Technology has supremacy in a number of quantum technologies. 
A range of organisations shine through, including the University of California system, the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, the Indian Institute of Technology, Nanyang Technological University (NTU 
Singapore), the University of Science and Technology China and a variety of national labs in the 
US (such as the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory). The Chinese Academy of Sciences is a 
particularly high performer, ranking in the top 5 in 27 of the 44 technologies tracked by the Critical 
Technology Tracker. Comprising of 116 institutes (which gives it a unique advantage over other 
organisations) it excels in energy and environment technologies, advanced materials (including 
critical minerals extraction and processing) and in a range of quantum, defence and AI technologies 
including advanced data analytics, machine learning, quantum sensors, advanced robotics and small 
satellites. In addition, US technology companies are well represented in some areas, including in the 
AI category: Google (1st in natural language processing), Microsoft (6th by H-index and 10th by ‘highly 
cited’ in natural language processing), Facebook (14th by H-index in natural language processing), 
Hewlett Packard Enterprise (14th by H-index in high performance computing) and IBM (Switzerland 
and US arms both tying at the 11th place with other institutions by H-index in AI algorithms and 
hardware accelerators).
There’s a human dimension to technology development that should also be factored into assessments 
of technological capability. Innovations are ultimately the result of researchers, scientists and 
designers with a lifetime of training and experience that led to their breakthroughs. Understanding 
where those researchers started their professional journeys, where they received the training that 
5

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
equipped them to be leaders in their fields, and finally where they are now as they make their 
discoveries, paints a picture of how well countries are competing in their ability to attract and retain 
skilled researchers from the global pool of talent.
Who are the individuals publishing the high-impact research that’s propelled China to an impressive 
lead? Where did they study and train? In advanced aircraft engines (including hypersonics), in which 
China is publishing more than four times as much high-impact research as the US (2nd place), there 
are two key insights. First, the majority (68.6%) of high-impact authors trained at Chinese universities 
and now work in Chinese research institutions. Second, China is also attracting talent to the workplace 
from democratic countries: 21.6% of high-impact authors completed their postgraduate training in a 
Five-Eyes country (US = 9.8%, UK = 7.8%, Canada = 3.9%, Australia = none, New Zealand = none), 2% 
trained in the EU, and 2% trained in Japan. Although not quantified in this work, this is very likely to 
be a combination of Chinese nationals who went abroad for training and brought their newly acquired 
expertise back to China, and foreign nationals moving to China to work at a research institution 
or company.
World-leading research institutes typically also provide training for the next generation of innovators 
through high-quality undergraduates, masters and PhDs, and employment opportunities in which 
junior researchers are mentored by experts. As China claims seven of the world’s top 10 research 
institutions for advanced aircraft engines (including hypersonics), its training system is largely 
decoupled, as there’s a sufficient critical mass of domestic expertise to train the next generation of 
top scientists. However, a steady supply of new ideas and techniques is also provided by individuals 
trained overseas who are attracted to work in Chinese institutions.
A crucial question to ask is whether expertise in high-impact research translates into (sticking with the 
same example) the manufacture of world-leading jet engines. What of reports of reliability problems 
experienced with Chinese-manufactured jet engines?11 The skill set required for leading-edge engine 
research differs from the expertise, tacit knowledge and human capital needed to manufacture jet 
engines to extreme reliability requirements.12 This is an important caveat that readers should keep 
in mind, and it’s one we point out in multiple places throughout the report. As one external reviewer 
put it, ‘If you’re good at origami but don’t yet excel at making decent paper, are you really good at 
origami?’ Naturally, manufacturing capability lags research breakthroughs. However, in the example of 
jet-engine manufacturing, China appears to be making strides13 and has recognised the ‘choke-point’ 
of being entirely reliant on US and Swedish companies for the precision-grade stainless steel required 
for bearings in high performance aircraft engines.14 China’s excellent research performance in this 
area most likely reflects the prioritisation and investment by the CCP to overcome the reliability, and 
choke-point, hurdles of previous years.15 
But whether the focus is jet engines or advanced robotics, actualising research performance, no 
matter how impressive, into major technological gains can be a difficult and complicated step 
that requires other inputs (in addition to high quality research). However, what ASPI’s new Critical 
Technology Tracker gives us - beyond datasets showing research performance - are unique insights into 
strategy, intent and potential future capabilities. It also provides valuable insights into the spread, and 
concentrations of, global expertise across a range of critical areas. 
6 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
There are many ways in which countries (governments, businesses and civil society) can use the new 
datasets available in the Critical Technology Tracker. It can be used to support strategic planning, 
enable more targeted investment, or facilitate the establishment of new global partnerships (to name 
just a few possibilities). For example, Australia has one of the world’s biggest lithium reserves and 
has all the critical minerals for making lithium batteries.16 As an established leader in photovoltaics 
technology,17 Australia has the potential to guarantee its energy security by focusing on electric 
batteries, critical minerals extraction and processing and photovoltaics technologies while locally 
capitalising on its onshore critical-minerals resources. As the world’s second largest producer of 
aluminium, Australia can reduce its greenhouse emissions by using both hydrogen and electricity 
generated from renewable sources in its aluminium production.18 Strategic funding in these 
interconnected critical technology could reduce the current tech monopoly risks revealed by the 
Critical Technology Tracker and support new tech industries with job creation.
These findings should be a wake-up call for democratic nations. It has become imperative, now more 
than ever, that political leaders, policymakers, businesses and civil society use empirical open-source 
data to inform decision-making across different technological areas so that, in the years and decades 
to come, they can reap the benefits of new policies and investments they must make now. Urgent 
policy changes, increased investment and global collaboration are required from many countries to 
close the enormous and widening gap. The costs of catching up will be significant, but the costs of 
inaction could be far greater (Table 1).
7

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Table 1: Lead country and technology monopoly risk.
Technology Lead 
country
Technology 
monopoly risk
Advanced materials and manufacturing
1. Nanoscale materials and manufacturing China high
2. Coatings China high
3. Smart materials China medium
4. Advanced composite materials China medium
5. Novel metamaterials China medium
6. High-specification machining processes China medium
7. Advanced explosives and energetic materials China medium
8. Critical minerals extraction and processing China low
9. Advanced magnets and superconductors China low
10. Advanced protection China low
11. Continuous flow chemical synthesis China low
12. Additive manufacturing (incl. 3D printing) China low
Artificial intelligence, computing and communications
13. Advanced radiofrequency communications (incl. 5G and 6G) China high
14. Advanced optical communications China medium
15. Artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and hardware accelerators China medium
16. Distributed ledgers China medium
17. Advanced data analytics China medium
18. Machine learning (incl. neural networks and deep learning) China low
19. Protective cybersecurity technologies China low
20. High performance computing USA low
21. Advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication USA low
22. Natural language processing (incl. speech and text recognition and analysis) USA low
Energy and environment
23. Hydrogen and ammonia for power China high
24. Supercapacitors China high
25. Electric batteries China high
26. Photovoltaics China medium
27. Nuclear waste management and recycling China medium
28. Directed energy technologies China medium
29. Biofuels China low
30. Nuclear energy China low
Quantum
31. Quantum computing USA medium
32. Post-quantum cryptography China low
33. Quantum communications (incl. quantum key distribution) China low
34. Quantum sensors China low
Biotechnology, gene technology and vaccines
35. Synthetic biology China high
36. Biological manufacturing China medium
37. Vaccines and medical countermeasures USA medium
Sensing, timing and navigation
38. Photonic sensors China high
Defence, space, robotics and transportation 
39. Advanced aircraft engines (incl. hypersonics) China medium
40. Drones, swarming and collaborative robots China medium
41. Small satellites USA low
42. Autonomous systems operation technology China low
43. Advanced robotics China low
44. Space launch systems USA low
Note: A visual summary of the top 5 countries for each technology area can be found in Appendix  1.1
8 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Why research is vital for scientific and 
technological advancements
We selected one of many potential methodological approaches (citations of scientific publications) 
because research publications are a major contributor to technological, scientific and commercial 
strength.19 The effect is most pronounced for high-quality papers (that is, the most highly cited).20 
For example, 80% of research papers in the top 0.01% of high-quality research (measured by three- 
year citation counts) are referenced in patents.21 This drops to 60% for the top 0.1% and 40% for 
the top 1%. This known connection between the most cited research and patented technical 
breakthroughs has been used as a proxy to measure relative institutional and national standing 
(see ‘Methodology’ section).
In stark contrast, those research reports in the bottom 50% are almost never cited in patents. The 
rate of growth in citations from patents is related to the number of citations from scientific papers 
and journal quality rank.22 Patents that reference high-quality science are referenced by subsequent 
patents twice as often,23 and patents referenced by other patents have greater value.24 Patents that 
directly reference research papers deliver 26% more commercial value25 than otherwise comparable 
patents that are disconnected from research. Science-intensive patents are high-risk, high-reward 
ventures.26 That is, a higher proportion of them are of low value, but the successful ones have much 
greater payoff, which increases the average value. Cited research publication data is thus a reliable 
measure of scientific advances and potential technological capability.
ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker and this report seek to assess the potential future capability of 
nations within each critical technology and to highlight long-term strategic trends including areas of 
focus for each country. We recognise that this snapshot in time (2018–2022) across each technology 
won’t reveal all commercialisations or show us rates of technology diffusion (how populations adopt 
innovations and new technologies) or necessarily reflect levels of investments that countries are 
making in certain technologies or the technologies that will end up in manufacturing. As we use 
public data, we can’t estimate the volume or quality of classified research conducted by governments 
and industry.
Nor does this project seek to provide a stand-alone metric to measure what might make a country an 
influential ‘science and technology power’. While there’s no such agreed definition, a range of factors 
could be taken into account beyond high performance in science and technology research; they could 
include policy implementation, entrepreneurship, commercialisation rates, regulatory frameworks, 
critical infrastructure, thought leadership, technology diplomacy (for example, influence in multilateral 
forums and in building coalitions of countries) and so on.
But as we raised earlier in this report, what this project does provide - in addition to new datasets on 
research performance - are unique insights into strategy and intent. It also provides valuable insights 
into the spread, and concentrations of, global expertise across a range of critical areas. Finally, it shows 
us what potential future technology leadership could look like (given scientific and technological 
innovation and breakthroughs are so often underpinned by research, and, most of all, by high-impact 
research). 
9

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Several other data sources are used to examine the technical capability of nations, and we evaluated 
many of them for potential inclusion in this project.27 Patent registration is the key mechanism for 
protecting the commercial value of new inventions. Analysis of patent citations and patent ownership 
according to country is a rich source of insight. However, determining the country of origin and 
ownership is a complicated process. Similarly, analysis of venture capital funding could provide 
valuable insight into the intensity of technical innovation. Unfortunately, obtaining consistent and 
trustworthy data is extremely challenging, especially at the international level. Thematic analysis of 
national research priority and strategy documents provides insight into ambition and focus but not 
necessarily into output and capability. Of course, were it available, a detailed and consistent dataset of 
current research funding from around the globe would be an ideal leading indicator of research effort, 
but it’s also worth noting that spending doesn’t always equate to impact and innovation.
Consideration of all of those limitations steered us towards using citations of research publications. 
International publishing conventions are relatively consistent, scientific publishing is a key output of 
research innovation, and citation metrics provide a consistent (if not universally agreed) method for 
identifying high-impact research at scale. Publication (that is, bibliographic) databases are especially 
rich and provide researcher details, including workplace address (that is, affiliation) and a unique 
researcher identifier known as an ORCID iD (Open Researcher and Contributor ID).28 The latter item 
allows dataset linkage and enables career-progression tracking. This reveals the countries (and 
organisations) that are gaining and retaining the world’s top technological talent.
We expect that the results will be a surprise to some and are confident that they’ll trigger public 
debate. Our hope is that the debate will centre upon whether we accept the risks highlighted and, 
if not, what policy and investment efforts, including collective action by states, are required. It would 
be a missed opportunity for the debate to get stuck on the relative merit of one analytical approach 
over another, rather than the overall trajectory and trends. We hope that the findings of this project will 
help build momentum towards solutions and a pathway forward. We also hope that debates will spur 
further attempts to measure relative capability by refining this method or developing new approaches.
Methodology in brief
A full and detailed methodology can be found in Appendix 2 which starts on page 57. Below, we 
explain why we focused on quality of research over quantity of research to rank countries and 
organisations (largely universities, businesses and national labs).
What do we mean by ‘quality metrics’?
Distinguishing innovative and high-impact research papers from low-quality papers is critical when 
estimating the current and future technical capability of nations. Not all the millions of research papers 
published each year are high quality.
What’s a citation?
When a scientific paper references another paper, that’s known as a citation. The number of times 
a paper is cited reflects the impact of the paper. As time goes by, there are more opportunities for a 
paper to be cited, so only papers of a similar age should be compared using citation counts (as was 
done in this report).
10 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Country-level quality metrics
Throughout this research project, we present three country-level quality metrics:
1) proportion of papers in the top 10% most highly cited research reports
2) the H-index
3) the number of research institutions a country has in the world’s top 10–20 highest 
performing institutions.
The top 10% of the most highly cited papers were analysed to generate insights into which countries are 
publishing the greatest share of high-quality, innovative and high-impact research.29 Credit for each 
publication was divided among authors30 and their affiliations and not assigned only to the first author 
(for example, if there were two authors, they would each be assigned half the allocation). Fractional 
allocation of credit is a better prediction of individuals who go on to win Nobel Prizes or fellowship of 
prestigious societies.31 Fractional allocation of credit was used for all metrics.32
The H-index (Hirsch index) is an established performance metric used for analysing the impact of 
scholarly output and is calculated from citation numbers of an individual’s set of publications.33 It’s a 
combined measure of quantity and impact and performs better than other single-number summaries 
of research quality.34 Calculating the H-index with five years worth of data (as we do in this research) 
eliminates a key criticism, which is that highly cited papers from decades ago boost the H-index 
but don’t reflect current research excellence.35 Another criticism of the H-index is that publication 
volumes vary by field of research, and this can unfairly advantage those in a field with high publication 
rates.36 The H-index quality metric used here compares countries within the same technology area. 
This approach reduces but doesn’t eliminate that problem.37 Neither individual papers with extreme 
citation numbers nor a large number of papers with low citation counts inflate the H-index used here. 
We calculate the five-year H-index at the institution38 and country levels.39
We include both the top 10% and the H-index as neither is perfect and both add a unique insight. In 
technologies in which 1st and 2nd place flip depending on which quality metric is used, the race really 
is too close to call. However, more often, the lead is large and unambiguous, and both metrics are 
consistent regarding who is leading.
The number of institutions that a country has in the world’s top 10 institutions is used to illustrate 
research concentration and dominance. This list is based on the number of papers that the institutions 
have in the top 10% of highly cited papers.40 
To build ASPI’s new Critical Technology Tracker website, we collected and analysed research papers 
published between 2018 and 2022 in 44 technology areas. The technologies selected were informed 
by our own internal discussions and those with government officials and other stakeholders who 
highlighted areas of particular interest. Where possible we covered all technologies within a category 
(e.g. energy and environment), and aim to provide analysis of additional technologies later this year. 
For each technology, a custom search query was developed for the Web of Science database. This 
identified 2.2 million research papers that we subsequently used for analysis (see Appendix 2). Web 
of Science (Core Collection) is heavily used by researchers who study scientific trends and it has well 
understood performance characteristics.41
11

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Bespoke search queries were developed for each technology area (see Appendix 2). We took particular 
effort to achieve the right balance between sensitivity and specificity, and ensure correct grouping of 
Boolean operators. Each query was carefully designed to capture the bulk of relevant papers while 
simultaneously excluding irrelevant papers. Each individual search generated a different size dataset 
(range 871 to 526,738: see Appendix 3 for exact numbers). The size differences reflect global publishing 
activity for each technology and the balance between sensitivity and specificity.42 The bibliographic 
records used were restricted to journal articles, proceedings43 and data papers.44 This restricted the 
dataset to exclude bibliographic records that didn’t reflect recent research advances, such as book 
reviews, retracted publications and letters submitted to academic journals.
We have decided not to release the search terms—of which there are hundreds of carefully crafted 
terms and search strings—so that countries, organisations and individuals are not able to manipulate 
future iterations of this project. Thank you also to Australia’s Defence Science and Technology Group 
for sharing material that helped inform the development and build of our own database search 
strategies, which we put many months of effort into. 
Results weren’t filtered by language, but the overwhelming majority of reports (98.7%) were written 
in English.45 This means that research papers published in domestic journals in, say, Japan, China, 
South Korea, France or Indonesia, outside of the world’s major journals, aren’t captured in this 
data collection, and that’s of course a limitation. However, incentivised by the parameters within 
performance reviews, and ambitions to deliver impact, be promoted and receive grant income, 
researchers and scientists prioritise their most important research for high-profile journals. In fact, 
Chinese researchers are paid large personal bonuses for publishing in top-tier journals.46 Databases 
such as the Web of Science aim to index the high-profile journals.
We chose the Web of Science database as it provides the necessary fields for our analysis, including 
the affiliation addresses of authors (to determine country and institution), authors’ ORCID iD numbers 
(to determine career histories) and citation counts (to identify high-quality publications). The ability to 
download data for offline analysis was also a determining factor.
We focused on the top 10% of most highly cited papers as our first quality measure for countries 
and institutions (universities, labs and companies). The number of papers is sometimes used as 
a measure of research impact, but our focus was on comparing, and differentiating, quantity and 
quality metrics in our datasets based on categories (and subcategories) of different technologies. It’s 
critically important to distinguish between quality and quantity. Other studies have also focused on 
assessing quality or ‘high impact’ or ‘top tier’ research as a measure to compare different countries’ 
performance.47 A 2020 MacroPolo study, for example, used papers submitted to a 2019 AI conference 
on deep learning to create a dataset of researchers and to track, for example, their country affiliations, 
institutions and career paths.48 The top 1% of most highly cited papers has also been used in some 
studies as a quality metric for countries,49 but the size of our dataset (2018–2022) was sometimes too 
small in individual technology areas to limit our study to the top 1%. For instance, for the talent tracker, 
with a smaller dataset, there’s a risk of over-reading the data by following the talent flow of only a 
handful of researchers.
As an alternative and a second quality metric, the H-index50 was also calculated for countries and 
institutions. Self-citations, in which an individual cites their own work, are a known limitation of 
citation analysis,51 including the H-index,52 but it should be acknowledged that self-citations can be 
12 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
legitimate.53 Parochial citation practices, in which researchers are more likely to cite papers from their 
own country, are also detected in the literature.54 This practice will boost citation rates for countries 
publishing a large volume of papers.
We wanted to place these quality metrics within a geographical context, so we summarised, using 
large-scale data analytics, the institution and the host country for each author from their affiliation 
address for each paper. Note that during the publishing process authors are required to provide the 
name and address of their research institutes. When a researcher changes jobs, their affiliation address 
changes. This is reflected in papers published after they move but isn’t retrospectively applied to 
earlier papers. For researchers affiliated with more than one institution, we divided their per-author 
allocation of credit further between each institution. For example, an author on a five-author paper 
who has two affiliations will divide their 20% weighting —10% for each institution.
We also used big-data analytics to count how many of the world’s leading research institutions are 
based in the lead country (by the number of papers in the top 10% of highly cited papers) combined 
with how far ahead the 1st country is relative to the 2nd country (see Appendix 1.1 for further details) 
and below we explain how we developed a technology monopoly risk traffic light system which 
focuses on concentrations of technological expertise in a single country.
‘Technology monopoly risk’ metric: highlighting concentrations of technological 
expertise
low medium high
The technology monopoly risk traffic light seeks to highlight concentrations of technological 
expertise in a single country. It incorporates two factors: how far ahead the leading country is 
relative to the next closest competitor, and how many of the world’s top 10 research institutions 
are located in the leading country. Naturally, these are related, as leading institutions are required 
to produce high-impact research. This metric, based on top 10% research output, is intended as 
a leading indicator for potential future dominance in technology capability (such as military and 
intelligence capability).
The default position is low. To move up a level, BOTH criteria must be met.
• High risk = 8+/10 top institutions in no. 1 country and at least 3x research lead
• Medium risk = 5+/10 top institutions in no. 1 country and at least 2x research lead
• Low risk = medium criteria not met.
Example: If a country has a 3.5 times research lead but ‘only’ four of the top 10 institutions, it will rate 
low, as it fails to meet both criteria at the medium level.
Top 5 country rankings: The two metrics along with the traffic light are given in the right hand column 
of top 5 country rankings tables throughout the report and in Appendix 1.1 in full.
We also tracked the global flow of human talent by identifying the countries in which authors 
obtained their undergraduate and postgraduate degrees. This information was obtained from the 
ORCID database.55 The current (or most recent) country of employment was sourced from the Web 
of Science dataset. Career histories were extracted for the authors of papers in the top 25% most 
highly cited papers in each technology area. Tracking flows between countries at three points in time 
13

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
slices the data into numerous possibilities (n3, where n is the number of countries). This means that 
a larger dataset, with more authors, was required in order to generate reliable insights. In addition, 
it wasn’t possible to build career histories for all authors. Not all authors have an ORCID iD (although 
registration is free) or remember to provide their ORCID iD when publishing. Additionally, not all ORCID 
records contain enough information to create a career history.56 Thus, the talent-flow charts in this 
report are effectively tracking a sample of authors from high-impact papers. 57 At a minimum, we 
needed a country listed for a bachelor degree (or equivalent) and a country listed for a postgraduate 
degree (masters, PhD, or equivalent).
This analysis revealed the brain gains and brain drains for each country (see the talent flow graphic on 
page 4—global competition for research talent—as one example). The 27 member states of the EU, are 
grouped together in the talent tracker visualisations to represent the cumulative strength of the bloc. 
Although undoubtedly there is talent competition within the EU, the shared geostrategic interests of 
the EU member states, and the relative ease with which talent can move within the Schengen Area, 
led to the decision to aggregate their contributions in the global flow of talent. The unaggregated 
visualisations can be found on the ASPI Critical Technology Tracker.
In all talent tracker visualisations, the four members of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (the US, 
Australia, India and Japan), also known as the Quad, were plotted, as was China. The other countries 
tracked in this plot are the top five performers (in terms of global proportion of talent) not already 
visualised, and the remaining countries are grouped together under ‘other’.
China’s science and technology vision
China’s commanding lead in high-impact research in almost every critical technology we tracked may 
be surprising for many. However, the CCP has been signalling, for decades now, the importance it 
places on technological advancement, talent, research and ‘emerging strategic industries’,58 and those 
priorities are regularly and publicly outlined in its visions and plans.59
The desire of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) to become a technological superpower stems all 
the way back to the exploitation of China’s weaknesses by foreign powers possessing superior military 
technology during the ‘century of humiliation’.60 Already evident in the early planning days of the PRC 
under Mao Zedong, this ambition was enshrined in CCP ideology in the concept of ‘self-reliance’ (则
力更生), forming the basis for what’s now known as China’s ‘techno-nationalism’.61 More recently, 
in the past two decades, Xi Jinping has added additional emphasis to these concepts, and has 
made investment and resourcing science and technology, as well as R&D, a core pillar of China’s 
development and innovation strategies.
In his speech at the 18th National Congress of the CCP in 2012, Xi’s predecessor, Hu Jintao, outlined 
that ‘the contribution of scientific and technological progress to economic growth should increase 
considerably and China should become an innovative country’, because ‘scientific and technological 
innovation provides strategic support for raising the productive forces and boosting the overall 
national strength, and we must give it top priority in overall national development.’62
14 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Later, in 2017, the report of the 19th Congress reiterated that:
[W]e should aim for the frontiers of science and technology, strengthen basic research, and make 
major breakthroughs in pioneering basic research and groundbreaking and original innovations. 
We will strengthen basic research in applied sciences, launch major national science and 
technology projects, and prioritize innovation in key generic technologies, cutting-edge frontier 
technologies, modern engineering technologies, and disruptive technologies. These efforts will 
provide powerful support for building China’s strength in science and technology, product quality, 
aerospace, cyberspace, and transportation; and for building a digital China and a smart society.63
In the years following the 19th Congress, scientific and technological innovation came to constitute 
the central propelling force for economic and social development for China’s leadership, but also 
the ‘main battlefield of the international strategic game’, as Xi Jinping himself put it in a speech in 
May 2021.64 To win the strategic game, these speeches materialised into practical initiatives to boost 
China’s indigenous innovation and technological self-reliance, such as ‘Made in China 2025’ (中国制
造 2025) and the ‘dual circulation’ economic strategy. The first was launched in 2015 and aimed to 
build China into a manufacturing superpower with a world-leading technology and industrial system.65 
Both have the explicit aim of boosting China’s domestic demand while reducing its industries’ reliance 
on foreign companies.66 While Made in China 2025 took a lower profile in the past few years following 
international criticism,67 such efforts are still visible in the latest initiative launched in December 2022—
the Strategic Plan for Expanding Domestic Demand 2022–203568—which has been interpreted as a 
revamping of Made in China 2025.69
The elevation of science and technology to the very top of the list of national priorities for the PRC’s 
leadership is reflected in the number of officials with technical expertise who were elected to the apex 
of the CCP’s ranks during the 20th, and latest, National People’s Congress in 2022. The CCP Central 
Committee went from including fewer than 20 technocrats in 2017 to include almost 40 in 2022, while 
the Politburo went from two to a total of eight (out of 24 members).70 At the 2022 congress, Xi again 
noted not only the fundamental importance of research, but also the power of talent, and went on to 
list the areas in which China has made great steps forward:
We have grown stronger in basic research and original innovation, made breakthroughs in some 
core technologies in key fields, and boosted emerging strategic industries. We have witnessed 
major successes on multiple fronts, including manned spaceflight, lunar and Martian exploration, 
deep sea and deep earth probes, supercomputers, satellite navigation, quantum information, 
nuclear power technology, airliner manufacturing, and biomedicine. China has joined the ranks of 
the world’s innovators.71
We should expect the CCP to continue to follow through on its strategic vision for science and 
technology. Developing a global lead in high-impact research will help support future technological 
and scientific advances and breakthroughs that will underpin everything from developments in green 
energy and biotechnology to new military and intelligence capabilities. Benchmarking the current 
state of the competition in these separate areas—including where the CCP is focusing its research and 
talent-development efforts—is of key importance in understanding how China intends to leverage 
technological innovation to reshape the global technology and geopolitical landscape and position 
itself at the apex.
15

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
China’s breakout research capabilities in 
defence, security and intelligence technologies
China’s dominance in high-impact research in technologies related to defence, space and security 
is clear from the Critical Technology Tracker dataset. Below is a visual snapshot showing the top 
five countries ranked by their proportion (%) of high-impact research output in six technologies in 
those fields.72
Four scenario-based examples are provided below, drawing upon applications at the intersection of 
multiple technologies in which China has the most striking lead: advanced aircraft engines (including 
hypersonics); future intelligence capability; AI; and drones. It’s worth noting that, beyond the six 
technologies listed, many more of the 44 technologies covered in the Critical Technology Tracker have 
obvious and less obvious military and security applications, ranging from advanced materials (such as 
coatings) to advanced data analytics.
As a reminder: the ‘technology monopoly risk’ column on the right-hand side of this visual snapshot 
contains three metrics:
1. The top number is the no. 1 country’s share of the world’s top 10 high-performing institutions.
2. The next figure is the no. 1 country’s lead in publications over its closest competitor (ratio of 
respective share of the top 10% publications).
3. A traffic light rating in which:
High risk = 8+/10 top institutions in no. 1 country and at least 3x research lead
Medium risk = 5+/10 top institutions in no. 1 country and at least 2x research lead
Low risk = medium criteria not met.
A table of flags and the countries that they represent is in Appendix 4.
16 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Defence, space, robotics and transportation
Table 2: Top 5 country rankings: Defence, space, robotics and transportation.
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Advanced aircraft engines 
(incl. hypersonics)
48.49%
 11.69%
 6.96%
 3.93%
 3.60%
7/10
4.15
medium
Drones, swarming and 
collaborative robots
36.07%
 10.30%
 6.13%
 5.15%
 4.53%
5/10
3.50
medium
Small satellites
24.49%
 17.32%
 7.82%
 4.36%
 4.11%
5/10
1.41
low
Autonomous systems 
operation technology
26.20%
 21.01%
 5.28%
 5.11%
 3.55%
3/10
1.25
low
Advanced robotics
27.89%
 24.64%
 5.49%
 4.81%
 3.79%
4/10
1.13
low
Space launch systems
19.67%
 18.24%
 9.81%
 8.18%
 6.53%
1/10
1.08
low
Defence breakthroughs: advanced aircraft engines (including hypersonics) / 
surveillance balloons
The world was shocked in October 2021 when it was revealed in media reporting that the PRC had 
tested a nuclear-capable hypersonic glide vehicle.73 However, that shouldn’t have been a huge 
surprise, given that China has a 48% share of the world’s most high-impact research on ‘advanced 
aircraft engines (incl. hypersonics)’. The key challenges of achieving speeds above Mach 5 can be 
addressed by prioritising advances in low-friction surfaces to reduce and dissipate heat produced by 
air friction and the development of novel materials able to handle high temperatures and high forces 
on control surfaces.74 Our surprise should have been even less had we also known that China is the 
global leader in other technological fields relevant to advancing hypersonic missiles, including novel 
metamaterials (46% of world’s top 10% high impact research output, 2.7 times that of the second 
placing country, the US), coatings (58%, 7.96 times the US), and high-specification machining processes 
(36%, 2.62 times India). Building a world-dominating lead in these distinct but interrelated research 
fields may have been a happy coincidence for the PRC, but it was more likely to have resulted from 
a well-laid strategy, spanning decades, that helped support the development of hypersonic vehicle 
test-flights.75
17

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Recent events that have put a spotlight on China’s surveillance balloon activity highlight integration 
between research programs with defence applications in the Chinese Academy of Sciences 76 
(high-altitude balloon research, military intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, and hypersonic 
weapons testing), which can be seen through the Critical Technology Tracker.
The Chinese Academy of Sciences is a stand-out performer in the Critical Technology Tracker 
datasets. It leads in six of the eight energy and environment technologies (no. 1 globally for electric 
batteries, hydrogen and ammonia for power, nuclear energy, nuclear waste management and recycling, 
photovoltaics, supercapacitors, no. 3 for biofuels; and no. 8 for directed energy technologies) and 
several critical defence and space technologies (no. 1 for photonic sensors and quantum sensors, and 
no. 2 for advanced robotics and small satellites). The Chinese Academy of Sciences is also no. 1 for 
advanced data analytics and no. 2 for machine learning in the artificial intelligence, computing and 
communications category.
Although balloons are conceptually low tech, their ability to (at least sometimes) slip through detection 
systems and carry heavy payloads is extremely valuable. The Financial Times reported that Chinese 
state television showed footage of high-altitude balloons carrying hypersonic glide vehicles in 2018, 
but that the video is no longer available.77 Video matching the description can be found on Twitter78 
and Toutiao.79 Comments below the video state these were scale models of hypersonic glide vehicles 
used for testing, and suggest the wing design matches the ‘I-plane hypersonic concept’ from the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences.80 The 2018 research paper describing this design has been cited 
by, so far, 19 subsequent research papers.81 Thus, it’s likely that high-altitude balloon research has 
directly contributed to the cost-effective testing and development of nuclear-capable hypersonic 
glide vehicles.
Future intelligence capability: photonic sensors + quantum communication + 
advanced optical communication + post-quantum cryptography
China’s research strengths at the intersection of photonic sensors, quantum communications82 and 
advanced optical communications, in addition to post-quantum cryptography, could mean that 
intelligence communities, particularly the Five Eyes, could lose important capabilities and suffer from 
diminished situational awareness. China leads globally in photonic sensors (43% of world’s top 10% 
high-impact research, 3.41 times the US), quantum communications (31%, 1.89 times the US), advanced 
optical communications (38%, 2.95 times the US) and post-quantum cryptography (31%, 2.3 times the 
US). Taken together, these observations increase the risk of Chinese communications going dark83 to 
the efforts of western intelligence services. This reduces the capacity to plan for contingencies84 in the 
event of hostilities85 and tensions.
China has reportedly built the physical infrastructure to claim the world’s largest quantum 
communication network,86 and has even established quantum communication with moving drones87 
and satellites.88 As with many things, the risk is cumulative—the risk increases as China leads in both 
cryptography resistant to decryption by quantum computers and the ability to share encryption keys 
via quantum communication. One mitigating factor is the current US lead in quantum computing (34% 
of world’s top 10% high-impact research output, 2.26 times China).
18 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
The power of artificial intelligence: AI algorithms and hardware accelerators + 
electric batteries
Weapons and intelligence systems driven by AI will increasingly determine the outcome of conflicts 
and tip the balance in the race for military supremacy.89 The Javelin missile targeting system90 and 
the F-35 fighter jet91 rely on advanced algorithms running on fast, powerful and energy-efficient 
hardware. Similarly, AI is used for the first pass of sifting through mountains of signals intelligence92 
to find potentially valuable insights,93 and for the fusion of datasets,94 which are then scrutinised by 
human analysts.95
China is leading artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and hardware accelerators (37% of world’s top 
10% high-impact research output, 2.76 times the US). Lower power-consumption hardware means 
the possibility of training more sophisticated AI models for use in portable military hardware, and 
lowering power costs by an order of magnitude. Paired with better electric batteries—again China is 
the global leader (a striking lead of 65%, 5.51 times the US)—this enables the deployment of more 
sophisticated military hardware96 to soldiers on the battlefield.97 Research innovations and scientific 
breakthroughs will continue to translate into increasingly sophisticated AI-enhanced equipment in the 
hands of military commanders around the world (at least in those countries investing in, or buying, 
such technologies). On the current trajectory, as the perceived capability gap narrows in the years 
and decades to come, China’s cost calculations for taking Taiwan by force will be lower, and the risk of 
major-power conflict could rise.98
Military use of drones: drones, swarming and collaborative robots + autonomous 
systems + electric batteries + directed-energy technologies
Drones have a somewhat nebulous public image owing to their wide variety of use cases. Some think 
first of state-of-the-art remotely operated fixed-wing aircraft such as the Boeing Ghost Bat.99 Others 
think of small quad-copter drones used for surveying and aerial photography. A drone mimicking 
the outline and movement of a bird was recovered in Pakistan, and was reportedly used to video 
unsuspecting insurgents.100
The military use of drones, and the distinct and asymmetrical military and intelligence advantage 
they can provide to those who excel in drone warfare, highlights where some of the competition for 
future drone capability is most intense in the Critical Technology Tracker. Flying drones in the vicinity 
of military exercises and over sensitive defence locations creates unparalleled intelligence-collection 
opportunities for adversaries.101
But the real game changer for military purposes comes in the form of swarming and collaborative 
drones. Zhejiang University in China recently demonstrated drone swarms autonomously navigating 
through complex environments and using computer vision algorithms to identify humans.102 This 
university ranks highly in many technologies and was also rated high risk by ASPI’s China Defence 
University Tracker.103 The breakthrough lies in the ability to share information collected from the 
sensors in each drone with the entire swarm, resulting in vastly superior situational awareness.104 
More advanced battery technology enables such drones to operate over longer distances, for greater 
lengths of time, and to house more sophisticated systems.
19

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
China has a 3.5 times greater share of high-impact publications in drones, swarming and collaborative 
robots and five of the world’s top 10 institutions. Likewise, for electric batteries, China has a 
5.5 times lead over the US in its share of high-impact research, and eight of the top 10 institutions 
are based in China. The only technology within this application in which China doesn’t eclipse its 
rivals is autonomous systems, for which China’s lead is a more modest 1.2 times, and in which far 
fewer field-leading institutions are China-based (three out of 10 are China-based; four out of 10 are 
US-based).
Defending against swarming drones is a huge challenge. In recent years, there’s been an increasing 
focus on using directed electromagnetic pulses to destroy drones’ electronics, delivered from both 
small105 and large form factor devices.106 China leads in directed energy technologies with 2.05 times 
the US in high-impact publications and has seven of the world’s top 10 institutions. Another approach 
is tricking the algorithms controlling the drone swarm such that drones collide or attack a dummy 
target.107 This is known as ‘adversarial AI’, and the techniques for defending against such attacks sit 
within protective cybersecurity technologies, which China leads at 1.33 times the US in high-impact 
research and has four of the world’s top 10 institutions.
Technology deep dives
This section provides in-depth analysis of our findings in three technology areas: artificial intelligence, 
quantum technologies and advanced materials and manufacturing. We provide brief contextual 
material on how the technology unlocks value, pivotal moments in the technology’s development, 
the universities and companies producing the best research, and any noteworthy insights into funding 
or national strategies. For each technology area, we have included a table of the top five ranked 
countries and the technology monopoly risk, insights and context from the top 20 institutions, 
and key points from the talent tracker.
If a deep dive into these technology fields isn’t for you, jump ahead to the ‘Policy recommendations’ 
section.
Artificial intelligence, computing and communications
Ten technologies sit within the artificial intelligence, computing, and communications category in 
ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker. AI, more than any other technology, continues to dominate the 
public debate. Within two months from its release by OpenAI, the online chatbot ChatGPT has 
acquired over 100 million regular users.108 As a measure of its impact: it took TikTok over nine months 
and Instagram over 2.5 years to achieve the same user take-up. Most significantly, ChatGPT aspires 
to satisfy the Turing test, in which a human is unable to distinguish a chatbot-generated response 
from a human response. ChatGPT109 is built on a language model trained on big data,110 combining 
supervised learning and reinforced learning from human feedback. Thus, chatbots such as ChatGPT, 
Google’s Apprentice Bard111 and the like benefit from developments in a number of AI subcategories 
that we’re now tracking, including AI algorithms and hardware, machine learning and natural language 
processing technologies.
20 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
The demand for faster AI capabilities has placed AI chips112 at the centre of the race for a tech-driven 
economy and boosted research. Silicon Valley technology companies are among the top performers, 
which shows that high-impact research spans universities and the private sector. This highlights the 
importance of a tech-driven ecosystem; that is, a country must have a thriving university sector and 
private industry to achieve and maintain the research lead.
Table 3: Top 5 country rankings: Artificial intelligence, computing and communications.
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Advanced radiofrequency 
communications (incl. 5G 
and 6G)
 29.65%
 9.50%
 5.18%
 4.89%
 4.83%
8/10
3.12
high
Advanced optical 
communications
37.69%
 12.76%
 5.64%
 3.88%
 3.48%
8/10
2.95
medium
Artificial intelligence (AI) 
algorithms and hardware 
accelerators
 36.62%
 13.26%
 4.20%
 4.15%
 3.48%
7/10
2.76
medium
Distributed ledgers
28.38%
 11.32%
 8.94%
 5.54%
 4.81%
6/10
2.51
medium
Advanced data analytics
31.23%
 15.45%
 6.02%
 4.19%
 3.92%
8/10
2.02
medium
Machine learning (incl. 
neural networks and 
deep learning)
 33.20%
 17.93%
 4.87%
 3.87%
 3.32%
7/10
1.85
low
Protective cybersecurity 
technologies
23.33%
 16.80%
 7.67%
 5.71%
 5.20%
5/10
1.33
low
High performance 
computing
29.31%
 25.57%
 6.34%
 4.68%
 3.98%
3/10
1.15
low
Advanced integrated circuit 
design and fabrication
24.18%
 21.19%
 7.16%
 4.46%
 3.57%
4/10
1.14
low
Natural language 
processing (incl. speech 
and text recognition 
and analysis)
25.73%
 23.57%
 5.74%
 4.55%
 3.37%
5/10
1.09
low
21

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
The US excels in the design and development of the most advanced semiconductor chips and has a 
research lead in the technology areas of high performance computing and advanced integrated circuit 
design and fabrication. It’s worth mentioning that, while Taiwan is a semiconductor manufacturing 
powerhouse and is supplying over 90% of the world’s advanced semiconductors, most of the chip 
research and design is actually conducted in the US.113 In our data, Taiwan ranks ninth for the number 
of papers in the top 10% of highly cited papers for advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication, 
while the top Taiwanese institution, the National Chiao Tung University, is in sixth place (see Figure 1(c) 
below).
Figure 1: Top 20 institutions in advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication by (a) the weighted number of 
publications (b) H-index and (c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications. 
Note that some institutions which were equally ranked at 20, were truncated for clarity.
Within the AI, computing, and communications category, advanced integrated circuit design and 
fabrication has the highest number of countries represented and is ranked low on our tech monopoly 
risk measure. Four European countries (Belgium, France, Germany and Italy), Canada, India, Singapore, 
South Korea, Switzerland and Taiwan in addition to China and the US appear in the top 20 institutions. 
The University of California system, the Georgia Institute of Technology and the University of Florida 
are among the top institutions, together with the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) in India.
Technology companies such as Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation (TSMC) and 
Samsung Electronics are the world’s major suppliers of consumer-grade and advanced integrated 
circuits, and are supported by local institutions such as the National Chiao Tung University114 and the 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology respectively.115
In 1984, the Belgian Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (IMEC) was founded by a group of young 
semiconductor researchers inspired by the Silicon Valley model as an R&D research centre116 and 
focused on developing silicon processing and fabrication for different generations of complementary 
22 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
metal-oxide-semiconductor technologies. Today’s IMEC employs more than 5,000 researchers and is a 
strong international player in semiconductor and integrated circuit fabrication. IMEC owns significant 
intellectual property, and the funding from major collaborations with international companies 
currently exceeds the government funding received from the regional Flemish Government.117 IMEC 
features among the top 20 institutions in advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication technology 
(14th by H-index). STMicroelectronics is a European company owning several wafer fabrication plants 
in the University of Grenoble and the University of Catania, which explains the presence of these two 
universities in advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication technology.118
According to the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA), the US is expected to experience a 
shortage of design engineers by 2030 due to a number of factors, including a yearly loss of 2% of its 
experienced design engineers and a strong reliance on international students (lower enrolments).119 
The cost of advanced chip design almost doubles with each generation of advanced chip design 
and, while the proportion of public investment in semiconductor chip design companies in the 
US was estimated to be around 13%, governments in Europe, China, Taiwan, Japan and South 
Korea have boosted funding for local semiconductor design capabilities (an average of over 30% 
public investment).120 In addition, South Korea, China and India offer lucrative tax incentives for 
semiconductor R&D companies. Our talent-flow data for advanced integrated circuit design and 
fabrication technology shows that the US has a significant talent intake from China, India, South Korea 
and other countries for postgraduate training, of whom a fraction choose to stay in employment, in 
agreement with the SIA findings. In an effort to counter China and bolster its local semiconductor 
industry, the US Government announced the CHIPS Act with a US$280 billion package and around 
US$11 billion for semiconductor R&D design, packaging and manufacturing.121 While the CHIPS Act 
will strengthen the local semiconductor manufacturing industry, it’s unclear how much the Act would 
match the level of public spending in semiconductor R&D design to the competition. The US private 
sector spent US$40 billion on design R&D in 2021 alone.122
Figure 2: Flow of global talent in advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication.
23

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
There’s a close race between the US and China for supremacy in the technology areas machine 
learning (China leads) and natural language processing (the US leads). These technologies are heavily 
invested in by the Silicon Valley ecosystem and other technology companies. However, China 
has a research lead in the remaining technology areas: advanced data analytics, advanced optical 
communications, advanced radiofrequency communications, artificial intelligence algorithms and 
hardware accelerators, distributed ledgers, machine learning, and protective cyber security technologies.
In advanced data analytics, China is the leading country and claims 13 of the top 20 institutions 
(Figure 3). This technology is important because it underpins the ability to derive novel and valuable 
insights from large datasets and deliver those in near real time to, for example, soldiers on the 
battlefield123 or pilots in the sky.124 From a commercial perspective, maintaining a lead in this area 
underpins the business model of search companies such as Google, ByteDance and Baidu.125
Figure 3: Top 20 institutions in advanced data analytics by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) 
the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications. Note that some institutions which 
were equally ranked at 20, were truncated for clarity. 
The top institutions in advanced data analytics include the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the 
University of California system (which comprises 10 campuses scattered across California)126 and 
the Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Depending on the quality metric used (see 
the methodology from page 10 for an explanation), either two or four US universities are in the top 
20 institutions. The University of California system and Stanford University feature in the top 20 
institutions of both quality metrics, whereas the University of Washington and Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT) join the list based on the H-index metrics. India has three institutions in the top 20: 
the Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, NIT India and the Indian Institute of Technology. 
Switzerland, Saudi Arabia, Australia and Iran each have one institution in the top 20.
24 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
The University of California system is the only institution to rank among the top 20 institutions in all 
AI categories. It’s the first or second ranked US university in all technologies within the AI, computing, 
and communications category, coming up as the top institution in machine learning, high performance 
computing and advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication. With Silicon Valley within its borders, 
the state of California is a tech hub, conducive to research commercialisation. With 10 campuses, the 
University of California (UC) system combines prestigious institutions such as UC Berkeley, UC Los 
Angeles, UC San Francisco and UC Davis. In addition, the University of California manages and operates 
one national laboratory for the Department of Energy—the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
(also known as the Berkeley lab)—and also hosts the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.127 This 
combination of industry and research institutions creates a vibrant tech ecosystem in which critical 
technologies can thrive.
Two Chinese universities follow closely behind the UC system; the Chinese Academy of Sciences and 
Tsinghua University both rank among the top 20 institutions in nine out of the 10 AI technologies from 
their publications within the top 10% of highly cited papers. Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology and Zhejiang University both rank within the top 20 institutions in eight out of the 10 AI 
technologies from their publications within the top 10% of highly cited papers. The Indian Institute 
of Technology is ranked among the top 20 institutions in seven out of the 10 AI technologies from its 
publications within the 10% of highly cited papers. An interesting finding is the presence of Singapore 
in all technologies in the AI category except for advanced data analytics, especially within the quality 
metrics: Nanyang Technological University (NTU) and the National University of Singapore are 
represented in six and five of the 10 AI categories, respectively. Singapore has the third highest GDP 
per capita128 and is one of the Asian tigers129 focused on critical technologies.
US tech companies are also well represented in AI: Google (1st in natural language processing), 
Microsoft (6th in natural language processing by H-index), Facebook (13th in natural language 
processing), Hewlett Packard Enterprise (14th in high performance computing) and IBM (both the US 
and the Switzerland arms rank 11th in AI algorithms and hardware accelerators, combining these 
two institutions together may bump their H-index higher). Another noteworthy finding is the strong 
representation of US Department of Energy (US DoE) national labs in high performance computing (see 
Figure 4): Sandia National Laboratories, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory are in the top 20 institutions when measured using the 
H-index metrics.
25

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Figure 4: Top 20 institutions in high performance computing by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and 
(c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications. Note that some institutions 
which were equally ranked at 20, were truncated for clarity. 
Despite its small population, Australia is strongly represented in the top 20 institutions for protective 
cyber security technologies: the University of New South Wales ranks first, and Swinburne University 
of Technology and Deakin University are also in top 20 institutions (Figure 5). Protective cybersecurity 
technologies are focused on systems, technologies and hardware designed for cybersecurity. This 
includes, for example, the automated detection of malware using software signatures, behavioural 
analysis of computer network activity to detect data exfiltration by sophisticated (that is, nation-state) 
actors, protection against denial of service attacks, and the ability to detect and block botnet traffic.
26 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Figure 5: Top 20 institutions in protective cybersecurity technologies by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) 
H-index and (c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications. Note that some 
institutions which were equally ranked at 20, were truncated for clarity. 
The US is generally good at attracting migration from overseas into its postgraduate training programs 
in all technology areas within the AI, computing, and communications category. Significant talent pools 
migrate from India and China to work in the US. Figure 6 shows the flow of talent for the machine 
learning category, which has the largest number of papers (half a million). This dataset tracks 14,525 
researchers from the top 25% of highly cited papers and it shows that, after the postgraduate level, 
the US loses a significant proportion of the talent while making an overall gain from the number of 
researchers it trains at the postgraduate level. A significant proportion of US trained researchers 
choose to move to China, South Korea, the EU and other countries.
China, on the other hand, makes a talent gain into employment across all technologies in the AI 
category (for example, Figure 6 shows that inflows to China at the employment level are greater than 
outflows at the postgraduate level). Australia appears to do well in attracting talent for training at the 
postgraduate level and retaining those people in future employment in all AI categories, as does the 
UK. India has a significant brain drain in AI algorithms and hardware accelerators, as many people opt to 
do their postgraduate training in the US, Singapore and Europe, but the brain drain in machine learning 
is significantly less, as India retains most of its postgraduate trained talent through employment. South 
Korea loses some of its undergraduates to the US in both AI algorithms (and hardware accelerators) 
and machine learning but eventually manages to retain most of its postgraduate trained talent into 
employment. Almost half of postgraduates from China leave to train elsewhere, mostly in the US 
followed by the UK, the EU, Australia and Canada. Many return home for employment (alongside 
inflows of foreigners moving to China for employment), but China doesn’t retain all of that talent.
27

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Figure 6: Flow of global talent in machine learning (top 25% of research papers).
The overarching question is whether the US can overturn China’s potential future leadership in 
AI. The US is on par with China in its employed talent in advanced data analytics130 and protective 
cybersecurity. In line with the US’s sustained leadership in advanced integrated circuit design and 
fabrication, high performance computing and natural language processing, the proportion of global 
talent employed in the US exceeds that of China’s. On the other hand, the fraction of global talent 
employed in China on artificial intelligence algorithms and hardware accelerators is more than twice 
the fraction of global talent in the US in this category but, together with other countries leading in this 
technology area (the UK, South Korea, Singapore and Europe), some of the interdependencies and 
supply-risk issues can be mitigated in a global effort.131
A US–Europe alliance, for example, in advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication would hinder 
China’s aim to achieve supremacy.132 For device nodes below 90-nanometres, only two companies 
can supply the relevant photolithography system: Nikon (Japan) and ASML (the Netherlands).133 Below 
5-nanometre device nodes, ASML has the monopoly for extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography and 
reigns supreme as a key processing tool supplier for leading-edge chips. In advanced radiofrequency 
communications and distributed ledgers, Europe is on par with or exceeds China’s global talent and has 
the potential to play a greater leading role in these critical technologies.134
Quantum technologies
Quantum mechanics was born from a series of scientific breakthroughs in the early 1900s and 
ultimately evolved into modern quantum mechanics.135 Its concepts have brought so much to our daily 
lives, from understanding semiconductor devices to future quantum computers. Quantum technology 
is currently present on governments’136 and country alliance137 lists that outline which emerging 
technologies governments around the world see as ‘critical’ to their future. Once a technology is 
named as ‘critical’, the issue of national security becomes important and limits the prospects of 
international collaboration.138 Quantum technology is also supported by over $30 billion of public 
28 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
R&D funding internationally.139 China is estimated to have the highest level of public funding allocated 
to quantum technologies (over US$14 billion)140 followed by the EU (US$7.2 billion) and countries such 
as Germany, France, the Netherlands and Sweden are among the top funded European nations. Israel 
is the highest investor on a per capita basis. Australia is also part of this international effort after a 
A$111 million funding announcement in 2021,141 including for its National Quantum Strategy and new 
National Quantum Advisory Committee.142
EU countries are among the top 5 highest performing countries in all quantum technologies. As a 
bloc, the EU is a strong competitor to China in all quantum technologies, including post-quantum 
cryptography, in which the US is trailing China by a larger margin than in other quantum technology 
areas (Figure 11).
Big tech companies such as IBM, Google, Microsoft, Alibaba and Amazon are the largest private 
investors, especially in the US, where over 80% of funding for quantum research is from the private 
sector. Private investments were around $1.4 billion globally in 2021 and were expected to be over $2 
billion in 2022,143 with the majority of this funding tied up in start-up companies focusing on quantum 
hardware, notably in quantum computing.
Table 4: Top 5 country rankings: Quantum technologies.
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Quantum computing
33.90%
 15.03%
 6.11%
 5.52%
 4.13%
8/10
2.26
medium
Post-quantum 
cryptography
30.98%
 13.30%
 6.41%
 4.73%
 3.69%
4/10
2.30
low
Quantum communications 
(incl. quantum 
key distribution)
 31.47%
 16.68%
 7.58%
 6.45%
 3.81%
5/10
1.89
low
Quantum sensors
23.70%
 23.27%
 7.76%
 4.29%
 4.20%
2/10
1.02
low
There are four quantum technology areas: quantum computing, quantum communications, 
post-quantum cryptography and quantum sensing,144 which are included in the Critical Technology 
Tracker (see above).
Figure 7 shows the top 20 institutions in quantum computing, which is clearly an area of US dominance, 
especially in the number of US institutions (11–12/20 of the top institutions) represented in our quality 
metrics. Three tech companies are in the top 20 institutions by the H-index: Google, IBM and Xanadu. 
Google and IBM are established tech companies set to offer cloud quantum computing services, and 
Google (in partnership with IonQ) is already offering cloud access to an 11-qubit system.145 To date, 
29

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
the world’s largest quantum computer is IBM’s Osprey, a 433-qubit computer, breaking IBM’s previous 
record of 127 qubits with the Eagle quantum processor.146 Prior to this, Google was the first group 
to define quantum advantage (over classical) with its 53-qubit Sycamore processor with a record 
processing time of 200 seconds for a task that takes 10,000 years on a classical supercomputer. Of 
note, the high qubits (>50) are achieved with superconducting components that require cryogenic 
temperatures. Room-temperature quantum computers have lower operational costs but currently 
offer single-digit qubits.147 Xanadu is a Canadian spinoff company championing the world’s first 
photonic quantum computer (216 qubits), offering cloud access.148 There’s still significant scaling 
required before these companies are able to offer quantum computers that reliably outclass classical 
computers in useful applications. Estimates suggest that around a million qubits would be required for 
practical applications such as easily breaking current encryptions or optimising financial markets.149 
Setting aside questions of feasibility, Google has set a target to reach this scale by the end of 
the decade.150
Figure 7: Top 20 institutions in quantum computing by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) the 
weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
The top institutions for quantum computing are the Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands 
(H-index) and the University of Maryland (top 10% of highly cited papers). One of the most important 
scientific breakthroughs in 2012 was the discovery of the Majorana fermion quantum states151 
(hypothesised in 1937 by Ettore Majorana), which has promising applications in quantum computing. 
The significance of these exotic quantum states translated to an international flurry of activities 
in academia and industry with Microsoft setting up the Microsoft Quantum Lab Delft at the Delft 
University of Technology in 2019.152 However, the quantum-computing research community was 
rocked in 2021 by the retraction of this seminal paper, citing ‘insufficient scientific rigour’ in the original 
data analysis published in 2012.153 We filtered out records with Majorana fermions to understand the 
30 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
impact that this retraction of research has on the institution’s ranking and found that only 30 out of the 
462 research papers by Delft University of Technology were on Majorana fermions. Most importantly, 
once all Majorana papers were taken out of the dataset,154 the ranking of the university in the top 
20 institutions remained unchanged. This highlights the leadership of the university in quantum 
computing. Delft University of Technology makes the list of the top 20 institutions across all quantum 
technologies in the Critical Technology Tracker, and its prime position is consistent with the high level of 
investment in quantum technology by the Netherlands.155
The lead held by the US and Europe is also evident in our workforce analysis (Figure 8), where, by a 
large margin, these two entities are able to attract and retain a large amount of global talent working in 
quantum computers. For a field contending with a growing talent gap, such a talent advantage places 
Europe and the US in an especially strong position.156
Figure 8: Flow of global talent in quantum computing (top 25% of research papers).
With a historical predominance in quantum communication (see box), China’s efforts in quantum 
computing gained traction later especially after its clear mention among the major science and 
technology projects announced in 2016.157 In 2021, the University of Science and Technology (USTC) 
put out two papers on a photonic quantum computer158 and a superconducting quantum computer,159 
both from teams led by Jian-Wei Pan,160 clearly indicating a change of pace in China’s ambition to gain 
dominance in quantum computing. While quantum computing is currently China’s weakest quantum 
technology, two Chinese universities are the only other institutions (apart from the Delft University 
of Technology) to be ranked among the top 20 institutions for all quantum technologies: USTC and 
Tsinghua University. USTC ranks higher across all quantum technologies.
31

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
China’s lead in quantum communications
Quantum communications is an area of strength for China. USTC is the top institution irrespective of 
the quality metrics, and a total of eight out of 20 top institutions are based in China (see Figure 9). 
Tsinghua University and Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands occupy the second 
and third places depending on the quality metrics. China’s lead in quantum communications is 
especially prominent in the proportion of publications in the top 10% of highly cited papers. 
China’s quantum research was spearheaded by the Xiangshan Science Forum for quantum 
information in Beijing in 1998, which resulted in experimental research in quantum information 
within several Chinese universities and research institutes, including USTC, Shanxi University and 
the Chinese Academy of Sciences’ Institute of Physics.161
The Edward Snowden leaks exposed China’s security vulnerability to US intelligence capabilities 
in 2013 and triggered China’s desire to secure its communications.162 This enabled USTC scientist 
Jian-Wei Pan to demonstrate the potential of quantum communications to Xi Jinping and other 
Politburo members, and he became known as the founder of Chinese quantum science. In China’s 
Thirteenth Five-Year National Science and Technology Innovation Plan announced in August 
2016,163 the CCP strengthened its quantum strategy further by listing quantum communications and 
computing as major science and technology projects for advances by 2030. USTC demonstrated 
China’s dominance in quantum communication by building the first fibre-based ‘Beijing–Shanghai 
Quantum Secure Communication Backbone’ in 2013, connecting Beijing, Shanghai, Jinan Hefei 
and 32 reliable nodes over a total transmission distance of more than 2,000 kilometres.164 The 
strength of quantum communications is that it ensures secure communication due to quantum 
entanglement, which effectively ensures that any quantum information is modified when 
observed. This effectively makes it difficult to amplify quantum signals in the conventional 
way used for current optical communications. Pan’s research team made another significant 
breakthrough in 2017 by using the first quantum satellite (Micius, launched in 2016), and the free 
space reduced attenuation to transmit image and sound information using quantum keys over 
7,600 kilometres between Austria and China.165 The Austrian Academy of Science is also another 
strong institution for quantum research: quantum researchers have been working there on 
fundamental quantum optics for over two decades, and it was where Jian-Wei Pan trained as a 
PhD student in Anton Zeilinger’s166 group (obtaining his PhD in 1999).
32 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Figure 9: Top 20 institutions in quantum communications by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) 
the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
The US and the UK are ranked second and third in quantum communications. Among the top 20 
institutions, five or six US institutions are distinguishing themselves in the quality metrics. Harvard 
University, Yale University, MIT and Caltech take the top spots (their order depends on the quality 
metrics), and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is the only non-university 
US institution ranked in the top 20 institutions. The only company making it in the top 20 in 
quantum communications is the Japanese company Toshiba, and this is due to output from its R&D 
labs in the UK, which include the Cambridge Research Laboratory and the Telecommunications 
Research Laboratory.
33

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Figure 10: Top 20 institutions in post-quantum cryptography by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and 
(c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications. Note that some institutions 
which were equally ranked at 20, were truncated for clarity.
Post-quantum cryptography is a relatively small subset of our Critical Technology Tracker dataset but 
is becoming an important critical technology due to advances in quantum computing. The security of 
our current network transactions relies on the RSA 2048 encryption keys for network security and is 
hard to crack with current computers within a reasonable time frame.167 The innate ability of quantum 
computers to solve complex problems and factor large semiprime numbers can crack the current 
cryptography system in an exponentially faster time frame compared to classical computing and calls 
for post-quantum cryptography that’s resilient to security threats in a quantum computing world. 
This must be implemented well ahead of developments in quantum computing to mitigate the risk of 
‘harvest now, decrypt later’ strategies.168
The Critical Technology Tracker shows, that while China is leading on post-quantum cryptography 
technology (with six to eight institutions out of the top 20 institutions; see Figure 10(c) of top 10% of 
highly cited papers), this is a low-tech monopoly risk with strong equal representations from the US, 
UK and Europe (three institutions each). Of note, two companies stand out in the top institutions: the 
Japanese NTT Corporation, which ranks 15th in the top 10% from highly cited papers, and Toshiba 
(again, the UK arm). This is another technology area in which even though the US is distinctly weaker in 
terms of its research and talent, Europe is on par with China in terms of employed talent and a Europe–
US alliance can change the tech order.
34 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Figure 11: Flow of global talent in post-quantum cryptography (top 25% of research papers).
In our dataset, the top institutions in post-quantum cryptography are USTC and Tsinghua University in 
China. An early release of a paper that’s yet to be peer-reviewed was posted on ArXiv (an open-access 
archive for research papers hosted by Cornell University) in late December 2022 with lead and last 
authors from Tsinghua University (a ‘last author’ is often the head of a research team), claimed to have 
been able to crack RSA 2048 encryption under certain conditions with a 372-qubit superconducting 
quantum computer.169 However, experts have expressed doubt over the validity of that claim, asserting 
a significant underestimation of the challenges on both the classical and quantum sides.170
Quantum sensing is the quantum technology that’s already seen the commercialisation of the 
first generation of quantum sensors in the form of atomic clocks and superconducting quantum 
interference devices (SQuIDs). Australia has its own success story in this field with the LANDTEM, 
which uses high-temperature superconductor SQuIDS171 for mineral prospecting because of their high 
sensitivity to magnetic fields. The second generation of quantum sensors is being developed in parallel 
with advances in other quantum technologies as it exploits decades of basic research in optical 
physics and condensed matter physics.
The applications of quantum sensors are enormous, ranging from precision timing (vital to the stability 
of energy grids) and next-generation positioning (enabling the satellite-free navigation of defence 
assets) to biotechnology (medical imaging leading to early cancer detection) and mineral prospecting 
(gravity sensors that can explore the passive fields from mineral deposits to gas and oil deposits).172 
Most importantly, the interconnection of different technologies becomes clear as breakthroughs in 
quantum sensors benefit quantum communications and quantum computing and vice versa.
The US is leading in quantum sensors, in which 10 US institutions dominate the top 20 institutions. 
MIT and the University of California system are vying for the first place (Figure 12). The country quality 
metrics place the US ahead of China on the H-index but neck-to-neck in the fraction of papers in the 
top 10% of highly cited papers. Germany is ranked third in the country ranking; the Max Planck Institute 
35

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
(ranked 7th) is the top ranked German institution in quantum sensors. China has five institutions among 
the top 20 institutions, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences ranks first with the highest number of 
publications within the top 10% of highly cited papers but ranks lower in the H-index. The Netherlands’ 
Delft University of Technology is again ranked highly, coming in at fourth in the top institutions on the 
H-index and the top 10% of highly cited papers, respectively.
Figure 12: Top 20 institutions in quantum sensors by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) the 
weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
Advanced materials
Advanced materials encompass all the materials that have been engineered to display superior and 
novel properties compared to their un-engineered properties. Progress in the field of advanced 
materials has the potential to shape the future of technological-advance-generating outputs (including 
new technologies and materials)173 with high performance characteristics that could, for example, be 
more cost-effective, energy efficient, durable, lightweight, fire resistant or smaller. There are clear gains 
to be made from advances in this area, and some governments, whether from a manufacturing,174 
trade175 or defence and national security perspective,176 are putting strategies and plans in place to 
take greater advantage of progress and innovations occurring in the field of advanced materials.
36 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Table 5: Top 5 country rankings: Advanced materials and manufacturing.
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Nanoscale materials and 
manufacturing
58.35%
 6.73%
 4.90%
 4.06%
 3.84%
10/10
8.67
high
Coatings
58.47%
 7.34%
 5.97%
 3.22%
 2.84%
8/10
7.96
high
Smart materials
42.57%
 8.13%
 6.96%
 6.69%
 3.27%
7/10
5.24
medium
Advanced composite 
materials
40.82%
 14.03%
 7.30%
 4.04%
 3.93%
8/10
2.91
medium
Novel metamaterials
45.56%
 16.90%
 4.01%
 3.89%
 3.01%
7/10
2.70
medium
High-specification 
machining processes
36.21%
 13.84%
 11.75%
 3.59%
 2.85%
8/10
2.62
medium
Advanced explosives and 
energetic materials
47.10%
 21.31%
 4.88%
 3.96%
 3.23%
5/10
2.21
medium
Critical minerals extraction 
and processing
36.68%
 13.39%
 4.47%
 2.79%
 2.68%
4/10
2.74
low
Advanced magnets and 
superconductors
33.36%
 16.37%
 7.54%
 7.09%
 5.01%
4/10
2.04
low
Advanced protection
35.05%
 18.72%
 5.26%
 4.74%
 3.04%
6/10
1.87
low
Continuous flow chemical 
synthesis
24.64%
 13.90%
 5.73%
 5.10%
 3.85%
4/10
1.77
low
Additive manufacturing 
(incl. 3D printing)
20.41%
 20.25%
 6.38%
 5.27%
 4.34%
5/10
1.01
low
37

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
The largest research publication dataset within the advanced materials category is on nanoscale 
materials, also known as nanomaterials, which have been the subject of half a million publications. 
Nanoscale materials have various major applications that exploit their engineered mechanical, 
electrical and photonic properties. The diversity in nanomaterial properties means it’s quite difficult 
to make in-depth assessments about how this critical technology is potentially advancing. Eleven 
of the 12 subcategories in the advanced materials category are directly related to their applications. 
Critical minerals extraction and processing has broader indirect applications in electric batteries, 
superconductors and magnets.
Notably, reserves of lithium, rare-earth elements and other metals (such as manganese, nickel 
and cobalt) are considered to be critical minerals as supply-chain issues become important for the 
manufacture of electric vehicle batteries, which requires a trusted supply of these materials.177 The 
risk of lithium shortages is a constant reminder of supply-chain vulnerability.178 A 2018 report from 
Austrade proposed a plan for Australia to become a major centre of lithium battery production due to 
Australia’s favourable foreign investment conditions and vast natural resource endowment.179
Our advanced materials dataset shows that the subcategory of critical minerals extraction and 
processing involves a significant number of China-based institutions, among which the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences ranks first (see Figure 13), but also shows a diverse number of countries among 
the top 20 institutions—notably, Belgium’s Katholieke University of Leuven ranks second or third in 
quality metrics.
Figure 13: Top 20 institutions in critical minerals extraction and processing by (a) the weighted number of publications 
(b) H-index and (c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications. Note that some 
institutions which were equally ranked at 20, were truncated for clarity.
38 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
The University of Kentucky is the top ranked US university in critical minerals extraction and processing, 
at the sixth and fourth positions in the H-index and top 10% of highly cited papers, respectively. Iran 
has two institutions among the top 20 institutions: the University of Tehran (10th in the H-index and 
ninth in the top 10%), and the Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute (17th in the top 
10% of highly cited papers). Within the quality metrics chart, there are additional institutions focused 
on nuclear materials: the Nuclear Materials Authority (Egypt) and the National Institute of Materials 
Science (Japan). Taiwan is also among the top 20 institutions; the National Taipei University of 
Technology ranks 13th (see Figure 13(c)).
India performs very well in high-specification machining processes (Figure 14) and smart materials 
(Figure 15) and is the second ranked country in these technologies in the quality metrics (top 10% of 
highly cited papers). India’s IIT is the top ranked institution in high-specification machining processes, 
and NIT comes close behind ranking third or fourth. India’s strong performance is mirrored in its share 
of global talent training and working in the field, holding an equal standing to China and the US in this 
respect (Figure 16).
Figure 14: Top 20 institutions in high-specification machining processes by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) 
H-index and (c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
39

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Figure 15: Top 20 institutions in smart materials by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) the 
weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
Figure 16: Talent flow of researchers who authored the top 25% of publication in high-specification machining 
processes.
40 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
In smart materials, three Iranian institutions are ranked among the top 20 institutions: the Islamic Azad 
University, Babol Noshirvani Institute of Technology and the University of Tehran (Figure 15). NTU 
Singapore ranks 17th (H-index) and 20th (top 10% of highly cited papers). The supremacy of China 
in the nanoscale materials and manufacturing subcategory is staggering: the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences and USTC rank first and second, respectively, irrespective of quality metrics, and 19 out of 20 
of the top institutions are based in the PRC (for both quality metrics). The only two universities outside 
of China that crack the top 20 in our dataset are NTU in Singapore (ranked fourth in the H-index) and 
IIT in India (ranked 20th in the top 10% of highly cited papers). China’s dominance in smart materials 
and nanoscale materials and manufacturing can also be seen in the talent-tracker data as well; China 
has the single largest country-share of researchers at each of the researcher career stages (Figure 17 for 
smart materials).
Figure 17: Talent flow of researchers who authored the top 25% of publications in smart materials.
In contrast, the novel metamaterials subcategory shows a greater global diversity in terms of 
institutional performance (Figure 18). Southeast University (China) ranks first, the National University 
of Singapore ranks second and fourth in the two quality metrics, and the Pohang University of Science 
and Technology (POSTECH) in South Korea ranks 10th and sixth (Figure 18). The USA has from three 
to five institutions in the top ranked institutions: Harvard University, Stanford University and the 
University of California system are among the top 20 institutions. The Australian National University is 
Australia’s first ranked institution in novel metamaterials (10th and seventh in the H-index and top 10% 
of highly cited articles, respectively).
41

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Figure 18: Top 20 institutions in novel metamaterials by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) the 
weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
Apart from high-specification machining processes, there are two subcategories in advanced materials 
in which the PRC doesn’t have the top ranked institution: additive manufacturing (Figure 19) and 
continuous flow chemical synthesis (Figure 20). For example, in additive manufacturing, there are 
six other countries among the top 20 institutions outside of China and the US: Singapore (NTU, 
National University of Singapore), Netherlands (Delft University of Technology), the UK (University of 
Nottingham, University of Manchester), Italy (Politecn Milan, Politecn Torino), Australia (RMIT, University 
of Queensland) and India (IIT).
Similar diversity can be seen in continuous flow chemical synthesis (Figure 20), in which Denmark 
has one institution (the Technical University of Denmark), Japan has three (the University of Tokyo, 
Tohoku University and Kyoto University), the UK has three (University College London, the University 
of Cambridge and the University of Leeds), Germany has two (RWTH Aachen, the Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology), and the Netherlands has three (Eindhoven University of Technology, Delft University of 
Technology and the University of Groningen).
International and national collaborations on these critical technologies can minimise future 
supply-chain risks and even out the dominance of one country in all critical technologies.
42 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Figure 19: Top 20 institutions in additive manufacturing by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) H-index and (c) 
the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
Figure 20: Top 20 institutions in continuous flow chemical synthesis by (a) the weighted number of publications (b) 
H-index and (c) the weighted number of publications within the top 10% of highly cited publications.
43

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
In all the 12 advanced materials categories, there are only two institutions that dominate the top 
20 institutions by making the list in 11 out of the 12 advanced materials subcategories: the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and the Harbin Institute of Technology. Notably, the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences ranks first or second in eight of the 12 subcategories. The IIT makes the top 20 list in 10 
out of the 12 categories (with first rank in high-specification machining processes and second rank in 
advanced composite materials).
Policy recommendations
Our policy recommendations are grouped into four themes:
1. bo
osting investment, driving commercialisation and building talent pipelines
2. gl
obal partnerships
3. su
percharging intelligence efforts
4. moonshots (big ideas).
The four themes contain a total of 23 recommendations. These recommendations seek to advance 
performance in areas where the current concentration of expertise is likely to result in breakout 
capability and technology monopoly risk. Ambitions for improved performance in highlighted areas 
must be balanced with maintaining the edge in leading fields (such as quantum computing, advanced 
integrated circuits design and fabrication and vaccines and medical countermeasures). We recognise that 
some governments already have in place some of the following recommendations, but many do not, 
or only very partially.
It’s important to emphasise that research excellence isn’t a tap that can be turned on or off at will. 
Substantial time is needed to establish and develop research excellence to the point where the 
research is the best in the world, in terms of being highly innovative and genuinely breaking new 
ground. Similarly, decades of investment can be destroyed by turning off funding in response to 
short-term pressures. In the language of economics: it isn’t a frictionless labour market. Furthermore, 
we must avoid the trap of rewarding research volume. A notable insight from this work was that 
many countries, especially Russia, for example, frequently perform well in many technologies 
according to research volume but drop below the top 20 when evaluated by the H-index or their share 
of top 10% of publications. High volumes of low-quality research isn’t the pathway to success in 
technology innovation.
(i) Boosting inv
estment, driving commercialisation and building talent pipelines
Assurance of stable long-term funding is important for attracting top talent, and governments must 
put in place more targeted mechanisms to incentivise universities, research institutes and private 
industry. There are international talent shortages in all the technologies covered here.180 As identified 
in our report, critical technologies often require high-level expertise (postgraduate levels) and/or 
specialised training. PhD scholarships, and subsequent job opportunities, are currently not adequate 
to retain our talent onshore. In addition, the lack of a technology ecosystem in some countries is often 
a driver for skilled researchers and technologists to relocate overseas for improved commercialisation 
44 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
prospects and venture-capital funding. This was the case in Australia, for example, with the 2015 
Silicon Valley start-up PsiQuantum.181 In order to improve their position, countries must focus on 
building more attractive career pathways in areas such as science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics (STEM).
1. Favourable taxation for venture capital investment
 Venture capital funding drives innovation. Governments should adjust taxation frameworks182 
to encourage private investment flows towards venture capital firms183 that are supporting 
technology innovation, R&D and commercialisation.
2. Proportional investment matching from public funds
 Resource-rich countries, such as the US, Norway, Canada, Brazil and Australia, should take steps 
to control ‘Dutch disease’ during resource booms.184 ‘Dutch disease’ diminishes investment in 
non-booming sectors and so starves venture capital funding for technology innovation when 
mining investment promises higher returns. One strategy is investment matching whereby private 
investment is proportionally matched (for example, at 40%) with public funds to stimulate the 
venture capital market.185
3. Countries need national strategies
 For individual technologies, governments should develop national strategies that are both 
clear and ambitious.186 Commercialisation requires strategic decisions and policies for success. 
A key example is the story behind TSMC, in which the Taiwanese Government lobbied US 
semiconductor companies to host its researchers in the 1990s for training in semiconductor 
processing and headhunted Morris Chang from Intel to come back to Taiwan and set up TSMC.
4. Public–private partnerships to build commercialisation hubs
 Governments and the business community should partner to support and build 
commercialisation hubs, some of which could be placed in research institutions (universities 
or labs), while others should be built in areas such as science and technology parks. Our data 
revealed some top performing institutions, which could be paired with well-funded centres of 
excellence (if not already),187 creating a critical mass of expert talent and specialised infrastructure 
to boost cutting-edge research. Universities don’t often have the resources to lead critical 
technologies to commercialisation, but commercialisation expertise in the form of national 
commercialisation hubs188 can lead promising technologies to commercialisation and create new 
technology jobs. New critical technology ‘centres of excellence’ could be created and equipped 
with a national commercialisation hub on the same technology to maximise benefits.189 For 
example, the positive flow-on effect between Silicon Valley and the University of California 
system means that researchers feel empowered to approach technology companies with their 
innovations. Similar dynamics are observed between Eindhoven and Dutch technical universities. 
We can initiate new technology ecosystems by creating commercialisation pathways and 
supporting university–industry partnerships. Defence departments should also seek out new 
partnerships and support commercialisation, the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA) provides an obvious model to examine closely given its success at fostering innovation 
and pulling in teams from both academia and private industry.
45

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
5. New technology visas
 Existing frameworks and minilaterals, including but certainly not limited to the Quad and 
AUKUS,190 should be leveraged to establish reciprocal technology visa programs among member 
countries. Such new visa arrangements should enable easy movement and provide work rights 
for both early-career and established researchers.191 For individuals seeking research training, the 
visa should provide reciprocal recognition of enrolment at the destination university along with a 
guaranteed period of work rights following successful completion of the training. It’s critical that 
the program supports young researchers to ensure that the best and the brightest are attracted 
and retained. Visa recipients should be provided with preferential pathways to permanent 
residency or citizenship at the conclusion of their studies to help reverse the brain drain.192
6. Extra weighting for tech training
 Governments should create or amend necessary rules or legislation to provide extra weighting 
for research degrees focused on advancing knowledge of critical technologies to encourage 
universities to grow (in some countries, funding calculations provide more generous funding for 
research degrees that fall within a field of study deemed high cost, and these are high-cost fields 
of study and work).193
7. Critical tech scholarships for both students and technologists
 Governments should immediately increase funding for specialised PhD scholarships and provide 
compelling financial incentives for technology companies to run large trainee programs. Each 
country could tailor such incentives to the technologies they want to specialise in over the coming 
decades and distribute them via relevant agencies, including education, training and/or science 
departments. Citizenship eligibility requirements should be considered at the policy design stage, 
and it may be appropriate for a greater weighting to be given to a country’s own citizens to build 
up greater domestic capability, in addition to those participating in friend-shoring and partnership 
grant programs (such as in technology visa schemes).
8. PhD scholarship stipends must be lifted
 Governments should increase all PhD scholarship stipends to ensure that they’re, at the very 
least, on par with the minimum wage.194 Doing so would immediately help to revitalise PhD 
programs and the university sector more broadly. Making this broad-based rather than just 
focused on critical technology will provide a more substantial boost to university income (via 
increased enrolment numbers across the board) and support efforts to scale up university-wide 
infrastructure and services required to deliver high-quality education.
9. Workforce training and upskilling
 Countries need to invest in building up their technology ecosystems, and governments should 
introduce greater workforce training and upskilling initiatives. Such initiatives could include, 
for example, subsidised training, rebates on specialised courses and support for on-the-job 
mentoring programs to encourage greater early-career talent flow into particular technology fields 
of greatest importance to each country.
46 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
10. Boost support for policy think tanks
 Governments—in addition to the private sector—should fund policy-relevant technology 
programs within their think-tank communities. Currently, very few think-tanks around the world—
especially in the West—have dedicated, high-performing technology programs that can inform 
and shape policy.
11. Visa screening
 Ongoing vigilance is needed in visa screening programs to limit illegal technology transfers (which 
is often difficult to unearth and trace).195 This must be particularly strict where visiting personnel 
are affiliated with defence research organisations associated with non-partner governments196 
and when individuals are involved with foreign technology transfer programs.197 This shouldn’t be 
a one-time assessment, and governments should be working closely with universities to follow 
best practice to limit foreign interference proportionately to the national security risk associated 
with their research programs.198 Where they don’t exist already, governments should build foreign 
interference committees that include senior government, business and academic representatives 
to enhance collaboration in countering the various actors that engage in interference and illegal 
technology transfer in the science and technology fields.
12. Export controls on talent
 The strategic application of export controls to place narrow limits on the movements of 
researchers with expertise in certain critical technology topics must be examined, even if it’s 
considered controversial. The knowledge and skills that expert scientists acquire over a lifetime 
are extremely valuable and can unlock technology innovation in a range of critical areas. 
Recruiting personnel to lead research programs in, for example, defence-relevant technologies 
in adversarial states poses a clear threat to a country’s national security (examples relevant to 
many countries would be one’s top researchers leading a cyber, nuclear or defence tech program 
in Russia, China or Iran). Any restrictions would need to be balanced against an individual’s right 
to freedom of movement, and so those limits should require a serious national-security risk to be 
clearly identified and be designed to be as minimally invasive as possible. Where such risks arise, 
entity lists should be used to clearly outline specific countries and research areas to which these 
limitations apply so that there’s no ambiguity. Recent examples include the US’s restrictions on its 
citizens working in Chinese semiconductor companies.199
(ii) Global partnerships
13. Build R&D friend-shoring opportunities
 Governments should build collective supply-chain resilience by exploring and developing mutually 
beneficial R&D friend-shoring arrangements.200 Such arrangements will enable countries to play 
to their strengths while providing supply guarantees for exposed areas. The arrangements could 
evolve organically from existing strengths that have emerged from the national research priorities 
and strategies of the member countries.
47

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
14. Divide-and-conquer responsibilities for breadth and depth
 Collections of trusted partners (organically or via certain minilaterals) could consider going one 
step further by entering into a formal agreement that assigns certain countries to take the lead 
position for a set of related technologies. Those countries could be responsible for establishing 
or expanding research and commercialisation hubs and hosting guest researchers from member 
countries. Participation in friend-shoring should be contingent upon signing up to a reciprocal 
tech talent visa program between members and providing scholarships supporting PhD 
exchange programs.201
15. Partnership grants
 Governments should create a special class of research grants to support collaborative critical 
technology research between countries that sign on to the friend-shoring and visa arrangements 
described above. Grant eligibility should be contingent on including researchers from several 
member countries and providing training for young researchers (including ‘sandwich’ PhDs). This 
could be modelled on the European Partnerships pillar of the Horizon Europe funding program of 
the EU.202 Grants should be aligned with current strengths, national research and manufacturing 
priorities, or both. Some examples include India, the US and the UK on high-specification 
machining processes; the Quad plus Singapore on nanoscale materials and manufacturing; the 
Quad plus South Korea, Germany and Singapore on hydrogen and ammonia for power; the US, 
Germany, Canada, South Korea and Japan on space launch systems; and the Quad and AUKUS 
plus Italy and Germany on small satellites.
(iii) Supercharging intelligence efforts
16. Grip up on critical technology efforts with a strategy
 Partners and allies should ensure that their intelligence agencies are ‘gripped up’ and being led by 
a whole-of-community strategy. For many, this could require new mechanisms, reporting streams, 
collection architecture and engagement initiatives. Being led by a clear strategy, in addition to 
a mission, is crucial, as intelligence communities need to do two things simultaneously: first, 
support governments as they race to catch up across some or many of these technology fields; 
second, urgently build greater capability to understand how advanced China’s lead really is across 
a wide range of critical technologies with clear national security, defence, economic and societal 
implications. Neither is a straightforward task.
17. A new China technology centre
 The Five-Eyes partners plus Japan should build a new dedicated China technology collection and 
analysis centre. This new analytical centre should be built from scratch and involve the creation 
of new teams and structures, not cobbled together from bits of existing or potential initiatives 
across countries. All countries involved in this initiative would make significant contributions to 
rapidly develop new reporting lines on selected China technology topics. That reporting would 
inform a range of decision-makers and urgently fill any gaps that might currently exist. Such an 
initiative would be successful only if it’s created to pool resources, maximise information sharing 
and promote innovation in selected critical technology areas. Secondments between countries 
involved in the initiative would boost trust, sharing and skills transfer and the position of head of 
48 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
this initiative could rotate amongst major contributors. Beyond the initial small group of countries, 
selected countries could be potentially invited to participate in the centre (such as India and South 
Korea) once up and running. 
 Low-hanging fruit: start with open-source intelligence
 Multi-government intelligence initiatives are always complicated. Building the initiative to start 
with open-source efforts offers partners a unique opportunity to move quickly to develop valuable 
new reporting and analytical streams, including in-depth data-driven analytical contributions. 
Starting the initiative by building up new multi-government open-source capabilities also offers 
governments the space and opportunity to deepen collaboration with partners in a more 
unclassified environment in which lessons learned, tradecraft and innovations (such as research 
and big-data practices) can be shared before pulling in classified programs of work into the centre.
18. Deepen collaboration between allies and partners
 Communities need to maximise intelligence engagement and cooperation in the areas of 
critical and emerging technologies. Communities must invest more in building and deepening 
international partnerships; this should include investing in and enhancing ‘intelligence diplomacy’ 
capabilities and the sharing of not just information but actual technological and data expertise. 
Countries can leverage both traditional partnerships (such as the Five-Eyes arrangement and 
partnerships across Europe) and newer groupings (such as the Quad). In order for democracies 
to build an aggregate lead and a greater technological edge in the decades to come, intelligence 
communities will need to play a key role.
19. Collaborate and build partnerships outside of government with research institutes and 
business
 The bulk of technological advancement is occurring outside of government in non-classified 
spaces, yet some intelligence communities struggle to engage collaboratively outside of their 
field, let alone outside of government. That needs to change, and communities must ensure that 
they continue to make an effort to engage influential actors outside of government who can have 
access to expertise, content and datasets that they don’t have access to (some already do such 
engagement well, but many struggle in this space). One way to deepen such engagement is to 
boost and better tailor funding support for open-source research, especially in the science and 
technology fields. Such funding mechanisms already occur in some countries,203 but sometimes 
the amounts are too small and grants too restrictive.
20. Intelligence Chiefs must talk and engage publicly more
 Finally, intelligence chiefs and other national security seniors must talk more to their publics— 
and political leaders must allow them that space. The whole point of a public service is to provide 
frank and fearless advice and analysis to inform better policy- and decision-making. Publics 
also have a right to also hear frank and fearless advice, and to be informed on the strategic, 
geopolitical and technological challenges a country, and its region, are facing that will affect 
society, the economy and their livelihoods.
49

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
(iv) Moonshots
Long-term funding via sovereign wealth funds for research, development and tech innovation
21. Establish large sovereign wealth funds
 Governments should establish sizeable sovereign wealth funds204 for research, development 
and innovation in critical technology that they add to each year. The funds should be set as a 
percentage of gross national income (such as 0.5%–0.7%), with co-investment from industry. 
Investment returns should deliver two funding streams: venture-capital funding and scale-up 
funding. The sovereign wealth funds should support the most promising R&D programs across a 
broad range of critical technology areas (from climate and energy to AI and quantum), and should 
be open to both the public and the private sectors.
22. Allocate some of these funds to high-risk, high-reward initiatives
 A minimum percentage of funding from the sovereign wealth funds should be allocated to 
high-risk, high-reward initiatives in selected areas in which the relevant country already has 
a competitive advantage or is seeking to develop one.205 The higher risk grants should be 
administered through a government body (or a committee comprising representatives of multiple 
relevant agencies) that has visibility of research and innovation occurring in both open-source 
and classified spaces. It’s important that priorities for economic security, intelligence,206 national 
security and defence207 and areas such as climate, energy and environment can be considered 
and priorities aligned where appropriate.
A Technology Act
23. Governments should look to legislate Technology Acts
 Similarly to what was announced in the US’s CHIPS Act, partners and allies should explore 
introducing a major piece of technology legislation that could aim to address many of the policy 
recommendations outlined above in a cohesive form, especially those recommendations outlined 
in ‘Boosting investment, driving commercialisation and building talent pipelines’. Such an 
ambitious piece of legislation would involve a whole-of-government approach, in addition to the 
dedication of influential politicians. In the countries where this hasn’t already begun, the findings 
of this research should help to provide policymakers and political leaders with a rare opening to 
embark on such ambitious legislation.
50 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Appendix 1.1: Top 5 country visual snapshot
Below is a visual snapshot showing the top 5 countries ranked by their (%) proportion of high-impact 
research output across 44 technologies. We have added a column (far right), which we’ve called 
‘Technology monopoly risk’. This metric seeks to highlight concentrations of technological expertise in a 
single country. It includes:
• number 1 country’s share of world’s top 10 institutions
• number 1 country’s lead over closest competitor (ratio of respective share of top 10% publications)
• a traffic-light rating:
– high = 8+/10 top institutions in no. 1 country and at least 3x times research lead
– medium = 5+/10 top institutions in no. 1 country and at least 2x times research lead
– low = medium criteria not met
Advanced materials and manufacturing
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Nanoscale materials and 
manufacturing
58.35%
 6.73%
 4.90%
 4.06%
 3.84%
10/10
8.67
high
Coatings
58.47%
 7.34%
 5.97%
 3.22%
 2.84%
8/10
7.96
high
Smart materials
42.57%
 8.13%
 6.96%
 6.69%
 3.27%
7/10
5.24
medium
Advanced composite 
materials
40.82%
 14.03%
 7.30%
 4.04%
 3.93%
8/10
2.91
medium
Novel metamaterials
45.56%
 16.90%
 4.01%
 3.89%
 3.01%
7/10
2.70
medium
High-specification 
machining processes
36.21%
 13.84%
 11.75%
 3.59%
 2.85%
8/10
2.62
medium
Advanced explosives and 
energetic materials
47.10%
 21.31%
 4.88%
 3.96%
 3.23%
5/10
2.21
medium
Critical minerals extraction 
and processing
36.68%
 13.39%
 4.47%
 2.79%
 2.68%
4/10
2.74
low
51

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Advanced magnets and 
superconductors
33.36%
 16.37%
 7.54%
 7.09%
 5.01%
4/10
2.04
low
Advanced protection
35.05%
 18.72%
 5.26%
 4.74%
 3.04%
6/10
1.87
low
Continuous flow chemical 
synthesis
24.64%
 13.90%
 5.73%
 5.10%
 3.85%
4/10
1.77
low
Additive manufacturing 
(incl. 3D printing)
20.41%
 20.25%
 6.38%
 5.27%
 4.34%
5/10
1.01
low
Artificial intelligence, computing and communications
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Advanced radiofrequency 
communications (incl. 5G 
and 6G)
 29.65%
 9.50%
 5.18%
 4.89%
 4.83%
8/10
3.12
high
Advanced optical 
communications
37.69%
 12.76%
 5.64%
 3.88%
 3.48%
8/10
2.95
medium
Artificial intelligence (AI) 
algorithms and hardware 
accelerators
 36.62%
 13.26%
 4.20%
 4.15%
 3.48%
7/10
2.76
medium
Distributed ledgers
28.38%
 11.32%
 8.94%
 5.54%
 4.81%
6/10
2.51
medium
Advanced data analytics
31.23%
 15.45%
 6.02%
 4.19%
 3.92%
8/10
2.02
medium
Machine learning (incl. 
neural networks and 
deep learning)
 33.20%
 17.93%
 4.87%
 3.87%
 3.32%
7/10
1.85
low
Protective cybersecurity 
technologies
23.33%
 16.80%
 7.67%
 5.71%
 5.20%
5/10
1.33
low
High performance 
computing
29.31%
 25.57%
 6.34%
 4.68%
 3.98%
3/10
1.15
low
52 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Advanced integrated circuit 
design and fabrication
24.18%
 21.19%
 7.16%
 4.46%
 3.57%
4/10
1.14
low
Natural language 
processing (incl. speech 
and text recognition 
and analysis)
 25.73%
 23.57%
 5.74%
 4.55%
 3.37%
5/10
1.09
low
Energy and environment
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Hydrogen and ammonia for 
power
60.43%
 6.74%
 4.71%
 2.83%
 2.80%
9/10
8.97
high
Supercapacitors
64.19%
 7.28%
 4.89%
 4.78%
 2.03
10/10
8.81
high
Electric batteries
65.44%
 11.87%
 3.81%
 2.80%
 2.43%
10/10
5.51
high
Photovoltaics
39.33%
 9.18%
 5.40%
 4.90%
 3.30%
7/10
4.28
medium
Nuclear waste management 
and recycling
35.95%
 16.55%
 6.51%
 4.51%
 4.39%
8/10
2.17
medium
Directed energy 
technologies
39.09%
 19.08%
 5.88%
 5.34%
 2.85%
7/10
2.05
medium
Biofuels
23.15%
 15.48%
 5.48%
 4.42%
 3.65%
5/10
1.50
low
Nuclear energy
26.83%
 20.45%
 6.11%
 4.39%
 4.26%
4/10
1.31
low
53

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Quantum
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Quantum computing
33.90%
 15.03%
 6.11%
 5.52%
 4.13%
8/10
2.26
medium
Post-quantum 
cryptography
30.98%
 13.30%
 6.41%
 4.73%
 3.69%
4/10
2.30
low
Quantum communications 
(incl. quantum 
key distribution)
 31.47%
 16.68%
 7.58%
 6.45%
 3.81%
5/10
1.89
low
Quantum sensors
23.70%
 23.27%
 7.76%
 4.29%
 4.20%
2/10
1.02
low
Biotechnology, gene technology and vaccines
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Synthetic biology
 
52.42%
 
16.75%
 
3.32%
 3.07%
 2.91%
9/10
3.13
high
Biological manufacturing
 
26.01%
 
10.35%
 
9.08%
 3.85%
 3.17%
6/10
2.51
medium
Vaccines and medical 
countermeasures
 
28.31%
 
12.57%
 
6.18%
 6.06%
 5.14%
8/10
2.25
medium
Sensing, timing and navigation
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Photonic sensors
42.72%
 12.52%
 5.74%
 3.61%
 3.06%
8/10
3.41
high
54 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Defence, space, robotics and transportation
Technology Top 5 countries
Technology 
monopoly 
risk
Advanced aircraft engines 
(incl. hypersonics)
48.49%
 11.69%
 6.96%
 3.93%
 3.60%
7/10
4.15
medium
Drones, swarming and 
collaborative robots
36.07%
 10.30%
 6.13%
 5.15%
 4.53%
5/10
3.50
medium
Small satellites
24.49%
 17.32%
 7.82%
 4.36%
 4.11%
5/10
1.41
low
Autonomous systems 
operation technology
26.20%
 21.01%
 5.28%
 5.11%
 3.55%
3/10
1.25
low
Advanced robotics
27.89%
 24.64%
 5.49%
 4.81%
 3.79%
4/10
1.13
low
Space launch systems
19.67%
 18.24%
 9.81%
 8.18%
 6.53%
1/10
1.08
low
55

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Appendix 1.2: One-page visual snapshot 
Table 6: Lead country and technology monopoly risk.
Technology Lead 
country
Technology 
monopoly risk
Advanced materials and manufacturing
1. Nanoscale materials and manufacturing China high
2. Coatings China high
3. Smart materials China medium
4. Advanced composite materials China medium
5. Novel metamaterials China medium
6. High-specification machining processes China medium
7. Advanced explosives and energetic materials China medium
8. Critical minerals extraction and processing China low
9. Advanced magnets and superconductors China low
10. Advanced protection China low
11. Continuous flow chemical synthesis China low
12. Additive manufacturing (incl. 3D printing) China low
Artificial intelligence, computing and communications
13. Advanced radiofrequency communications (incl. 5G and 6G) China high
14. Advanced optical communications China medium
15. Artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and hardware accelerators China medium
16. Distributed ledgers China medium
17. Advanced data analytics China medium
18. Machine learning (incl. neural networks and deep learning) China low
19. Protective cybersecurity technologies China low
20. High performance computing USA low
21. Advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication USA low
22. Natural language processing (incl. speech and text recognition and analysis) USA low
Energy and environment
23. Hydrogen and ammonia for power China high
24. Supercapacitors China high
25. Electric batteries China high
26. Photovoltaics China medium
27. Nuclear waste management and recycling China medium
28. Directed energy technologies China medium
29. Biofuels China low
30. Nuclear energy China low
Quantum
31. Quantum computing USA medium
32. Post-quantum cryptography China low
33. Quantum communications (incl. quantum key distribution) China low
34. Quantum sensors China low
Biotechnology, gene technology and vaccines
35. Synthetic biology China high
36. Biological manufacturing China medium
37. Vaccines and medical countermeasures USA medium
Sensing, timing and navigation
38. Photonic sensors China high
Defence, space, robotics and transportation 
39. Advanced aircraft engines (incl. hypersonics) China medium
40. Drones, swarming and collaborative robots China medium
41. Small satellites USA low
42. Autonomous systems operation technology China low
43. Advanced robotics China low
44. Space launch systems USA low
56 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Appendix 2: Detailed methodology
Data source
Research publication data covering the years 2018 to 2022 was downloaded from the Web of Science 
(WoS) Core Collection database.208 Bespoke search queries were developed for each technology 
area. Each query was designed to capture the bulk of relevant papers while simultaneously excluding 
irrelevant papers. A concrete example comes from the technology category of small satellites. These 
are often referred to as micro-satellites, but that same term also describes a section of DNA with 
repeating patterns that is important in cancer diagnosis.209 Best practice techniques for database 
queries were implemented to handle these edge cases.210
Classified research
This project uses publicly available data (via paid subscription), and thus does not capture classified 
research conducted by defence (and other) departments within governments around the world. 
Similarly, research conducted by private companies that isn’t published publicly is not captured.
Publishing in non-English journals
Since the data used in this report to represent by-country research output was drawn from the WoS 
Core Collection, the degree to which this database captures the research output of each country is 
a relevant consideration for the underlying validity of the analysis. This is particularly the case for 
China, where Xi Jinping has called for scientists to ‘publish your best work in your motherland to 
benefit local society’ and has instituted an explicit policy to promote publication in journals based in 
China.211 Indeed, China maintains its own bibliometric databases, the largest of which, the Chinese 
Science and Technology Periodical Citation Database, contains more than 14,000 journals.212 Research 
suggests, however, that in the STEM fields research is diffused in both national and international 
journals, and that those researchers based in China’s more prestigious tier-1 universities prefer to 
publish in international journals. In some fields, such as condensed matter physics, that are relevant to 
technologies such as photovoltaics and advanced magnets, research suggests that the WoS is wholly 
capable of capturing publications from China-based researchers.213
Although the Chinese policy references support for both English- and Chinese-language journals, as of 
2021 around 93% of all China-based journals in STEM fields were in Chinese.214 For those approximately 
500 journals that publish in English, the Chinese Government has committed funds to assist them in 
attracting submissions from researchers around the world.215
We made the decision to include citations only from journals in the WoS Core Collection. As a result, 
the findings may slightly underestimate the performance of scientists in countries such as China, 
Japan, Germany and France.216 While a case can be made for including the Chinese citation database, 
that would then raise the question: why not also include databases covering journals published in 
Japan or India? For better or worse, English is the current lingua franca of research.
It’s also worth noting that because of migration and workforce trends it’s likely that some countries 
are boosted by, for example, talent that they’ve attracted in from neighbouring countries or regions 
(especially when they share languages). For example, this is possibly the case for China, which is likely 
57

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
to have strong pockets of talent from Taiwan working at Chinese universities, and for the US, which is 
likely to have the same from, for example, Canada. 
Document types
The bibliographic records used were restricted to journal articles, proceedings papers and data 
papers.217 This restricted the dataset to not include bibliographic records that were deemed to not 
reflect research advances, such as book reviews, retracted publications and letters submitted to 
academic journals.
Defining high-impact research
There’s a large volume of research output,218 but not all papers are high quality.219 The incentives for 
researchers and publishers don’t always motivate high-quality research, and researchers in particular 
are pressured to ‘publish or perish.’220 In their effort to climb league tables,221 and therefore attract 
more students,222 universities push academics to publish in high-impact journals and maximise 
their citation metrics. Similarly, publishers are vying for their journals to be the avenue of choice for 
researchers, which helps them sell more subscriptions.223 We use citation metrics to surface truly 
innovative or groundbreaking research as summarised briefly below. Specifically, we use the citation 
count provided by the data column ‘times cited, wos core’ rather than ‘times cited, all databases’ which 
includes citations from the WoS Core Collection, Arabic Citation Index, BIOSIS Citation Index, Chinese 
Science Citation Database, Data Citation Index, Russian Science Citation Index and SciELO Citation 
Index.224 Researchers have emphasised the importance of clarifying which citation count is used for 
analysis.225 We used citations from the core databases in an effort to minimise the impact of citations 
from lower quality journals (that is, not included in core collection) to preferentially cite papers from 
their own nations and artificially elevate articles.226
Quality metrics
Weighted citation numbers
Credit for each paper was assigned equally between the authors named on each individual paper.227 
On a five-author paper, each author was attributed 20% credit. If one of those authors listed two 
separate institutions, each institution would receive 10% credit. The contact address for each author 
was provided in the data downloaded from Web of Science. A bespoke data-processing pipeline was 
developed to identify both the country of affiliation and the unique research institution name for 
each author.
Top 10% highly cited papers
The top tier of high-quality publications on each technology is defined, for this work, as the top 10% 
most highly cited papers. Publications were partitioned by year in order to control for the observation 
that papers published earlier have had more time to accumulate citations. The weighted citation 
calculation was applied to these papers and aggregated at the country level and institution level.
58 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Hirsch index (H-index)
As an alternative quality metric, the Hirsch Index (H-index) was calculated for countries and 
institutions.228 While the H-index is best known as a reflection of individual researchers’ performance, 
it has several measurement properties that make it useful. Briefly: the H-index is calculated by ranking 
a set of publications from highest to lowest cited; you then look down the table to see for how long 
the citation number is greater than or equal to the row number (see Table 7 below). The last row where 
this is true is the H-index. One useful measurement property is that a small number of very highly 
cited papers don’t bias the score. Similarly, a large number of papers with few citations don’t affect the 
score. Given that the dataset used is restricted to the 2018–2022 period, countries or institutions that 
have active research groups in the critical technologies investigated can be compared on an equal 
basis (that is, 
it doesn’t favour institutions established decades earlier).
With the H-index, older papers are more likely to have the most citations, so papers that are 3-, 4-, 
or 5-years-old are most likely to make the cut. In contrast, the top 10% is computed within each year, 
so the best papers from 2022 get through, as do the best papers of 2021, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Table 7: H-index example (H-index = 3).
Row 
number
Citation 
number Note
1 1,000 ← one paper with extreme citation count only adds 1 to H-index
2 5
3 3 ← H index equal 3 as row number = citation number
…
100 0 ← huge volume of low-citation papers has no impact on H-index
Research lead
The size of the lead held by the first country relative to the second country represents the risk of 
a technology monopoly developing. If, for example, the first country produces 10 times as much 
top-quality research as the second country, that increases the likelihood of a breakout capability 
being discovered and the downstream applications of that technology being controlled by the first 
country.229 Where the first and second countries are roughly on par with each other, a stranglehold 
control of a new technology is less likely to develop. This was calculated as a ratio between the 
weighted number of papers within the top 10% most highly cited produced by the first ranked and 
second ranked country (see Appendix 1.1 and 1.2).
Talent tracker
The talent tracker is built by combining two different datasets that answer two distinct questions:
1. Who are the researchers making significant contributions in a particular research area?
2. Which institutions were those researchers educated in?
The first question was addressed through the WoS bibliographic database, following a similar 
methodology to the research quality metrics (see above), but with a greater emphasis on the individual 
authors as opposed to the institutions that they’re from.
59

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
The second question was answered using the ORCID database.230 This database uses a unique digital 
identifier (ORCID iD) for each individual researcher in the database that links to their self-uploaded 
personal information (such as previous employment, education history and so on) and professional 
information (such as publication history), which tends to be uploaded by the institutions that the 
researchers are affiliated with. The ORCID iD resolves the author name ambiguity problem, which often 
complicates the analyses of bibliographic data. This allows, for example, for a Jane Doe conducting 
vaccine research at the University of Pennsylvania to be distinguished from a Jane Doe in the US Army 
Corps of Engineers conducting climate hazard research (note that Jane Doe is a fictional example of 
real scenarios in the data). Researchers are strongly encouraged by their universities or employers to 
register and maintain their ORCID record.
Conveniently, the WoS bibliographic records include this ORCID iD number alongside each publication 
for authors who have and choose to list that number. By matching the ORCID iDs listed in the 
bibliographic data to the career histories listed in the ORCID database, we’re able to establish a career 
history for many of the researchers making contributions to a particular research topic.
The researchers visualised in the talent tracker are those who worked on the top 25 percentile of most 
highly cited research papers. This percentile threshold was chosen as the lowest common percentile 
that produced reliable insights across all the technologies. For some technologies, such as machine 
learning which has around 865,949 authors, the top 25 percentile corresponds to 14,605 complete 
ORCID career histories (that is, individual talent flow lines in the visualisation). For space-launch 
systems, with only 2,866 authors, the same 25 percentile threshold corresponds to only 30 ORCID 
career histories. In interpreting the results, it’s therefore important to be mindful of the sample size and 
how that affects the strength of the data. Additionally, only the first 10 listed authors were extracted 
from each paper in order to prevent very large collaborations from skewing the data.
The talent tracker has three stages (or levels) for each individual researcher: undergraduate, 
postgraduate and employed. ‘Postgraduate’ includes both masters- and doctorate-level qualifications, 
with preference given to the country where each researcher did their doctorate-level qualification 
if they have both a masters and a doctorate. ‘Employed’ corresponds to the country where the 
institution they are most recently affiliated with is located. The country in which each researcher 
completed their undergraduate, postgraduate (masters/PhD) training and the country of current 
employment were used to create talent flows (see Table 8 below) between country nodes.
The height of each node represents the proportion of talent in the specified country at the 
corresponding stages in their careers. That is, the height of the boxes measures the fraction of global 
talent in each country by where they completed their undergraduate and postgraduate studies and 
where they are currently (or most recently) employed.
Since education history data is generally self-uploaded, significant variation existed in how researchers 
described and identified their educational qualifications. This required some degree of judgement 
to be exercised in interpreting and standardising those qualifications into one of four categories: 
‘undergraduate’, ‘masters’ and ‘doctorate’ degrees, or ‘other’ in the case that a qualification did 
not appear to fall into the other categories. This was generally quite straightforward (e.g. ‘MSc’ as a 
commonly used abbreviation for Master of Science), but could be difficult at times (e.g. ‘diploma’), 
especially given the plethora of degree-award systems used around the world. Since some terms 
were also used much more frequently than others, only the 800 or so words and phrases necessary to 
classify 99% of the education data were considered.
60 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
In instances in which a single researcher had two or more education qualifications at the same level 
(such as two PhDs), then the one most recently completed would be the one considered in the talent 
tracker. For example, if a researcher was awarded a PhD in Australia in 2014 and a PhD in South Korea 
in 2018, then the country that that researcher completed their postgraduate studies in, according to 
the talent tracker, would be South Korea. This was done under the assumption that their most recent 
PhD would most likely be the one that’s relevant to whatever research put them on the talent tracker in 
the first place.
WoS allows authors to affiliate themselves with multiple institutions for a single research paper, 
and those institutions are potentially located in different countries. While, for the quality metrics, 
a fractional weighted count was used to evenly split institutional credit, that wasn’t possible for the 
talent tracker, since it deals with the career histories of individual authors and therefore requires a 1:1 
correspondence between each author and the country listed in each node (that is, a single author 
can’t be split between multiple countries at a single level). Unfortunately, this could only be handled, 
for each WoS author that has listed multiple institutions, by selecting one from that list and ignoring 
the others. We used the first listed institution.
An important detail to note on interpreting the talent tracker visualisations is that, at the postgraduate 
level, where there are both inflows and outflows of talent, outflow destinations do not necessarily 
correlate with inflow sources. That is to say that the researchers leaving a country at the postgraduate 
level aren’t necessarily the same researchers that are entering. For example, consider Figure 21. 
While it may be reasonable to assume that many of the researchers going to China after completing 
their postgraduate training in the US are the same researchers that went from China to the US after 
their undergraduate education, technically the flows would appear the same if, instead, all those 
researchers stayed in the US for employment, and it was American researchers who were moving 
to China.
Figure 21: Flow of global talent in advanced optical communications (top 25% of research papers).
61

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Table 8 below lists the number of data points at three key steps in the talent tracker pipeline for each 
technology: the number of authors pulled from the top 25 percentile of WoS papers, the number of 
ORCID iDs listed by those authors, and the number of authors with a complete career history to allow 
for them to be plotted in the talent tracker visualisations.
Table 8: Number of data points at three key steps in the talent tracker pipeline for each technology.
Technology Authors ORCID iDs Complete 
career histories
Advanced materials and manufacturing
1. Nanoscale materials and manufacturing 268,648 61,745 12,475
2. Coatings 11,912 2,129 423
3. Smart materials 22,943 4,856 978
4. Advanced composite materials 26,487 5,546 1,182
5. Novel metamaterials 11,025 2,664 566
6. High-specification machine processes 10,880 2,257 398
7. Advanced explosives and energetic materials 4,778 870 181
8. Critical minerals extraction and processing 13,803 2,540 482
9. Advanced magnets and superconductors 6,319 1,519 280
10. Advanced protection 8,494 1,972 363
11. Continuous -flow chemical synthesis 8,393 2,122 418
12. Additive manufacturing (incl. 3D printing) 18,975 4,248 872
Artificial intelligence, computing and communications
13. Advanced radiofrequency communications 17,156 4,386 680
14. Advanced optical communications 15,352 3,631 717
15. Artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and hardware accelerators 2,594 572 116
16. Distributed ledgers 15,433 3,632 593
17. Advanced data analytics 27,836 6,339 1,117
18. Machine learning (incl. neural networks and deep learning) 349,189 85,432 14,605
19. Protective cybersecurity technologies 17,198 4,201 674
20. High performance computing 14,684 3,348 704
21. Advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication 8,177 1,929 332
22. Natural language processing (incl. speech recognition and analysis) 32,701 6,697 1,112
Energy and environment
23. Hydrogen and ammonia for power 40,760 9,315 2,069
24. Supercapacitors 26,708 5,239 1,195
25. Electric batteries 53,966 11,524 2,569
26. Photovoltaics 76,461 18,983 3,850
27. Nuclear waste management and recycling 9,448 1,881 374
28. Directed energy technologies 11,700 2,787 481
29. Biofuels 40,170 8,794 1,752
30. Nuclear energy 21,059 4,139 783
62 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Quantum
31. Quantum computing 15,323 4,266 845
32. Post-quantum cryptography 3,356 740 115
33. Quantum communications (incl. quantum key distribution) 5,630 1,523 319
34. Quantum sensing 20,934 5,303 1,058
Biotechnology, gene technology and vaccines
35. Synthetic biology 28,447 6,313 1,439
36. Biological manufacturing 59,907 13,493 2,610
37. Vaccines and medical countermeasures 82,761 15,258 2,678
Sensing, timing and navigation
38. Photonic sensors 102,022 23,938 4,551
Defence, space, robotics, transportation
39. Advanced aircraft engines (incl. hypersonics) 2,406 481 85
40. Drones, swarming and collaborative robots 8,574 2,082 332
41. Small satellites 6,398 1,382 252
42. Autonomous systems operation technology 35,184 9,050 1,508
43. Advanced robotics 44,835 10,088 1,778
44. Space launch systems 1,003 208 30
Data-processing pipelines
Data-processing pipelines were developed to identify the country and research institution in which 
each individual researcher works, as well as to place awarded degrees into standardised categories. 
This involved text processing and pattern matching to achieve high rates of entity resolution. This 
work was performed iteratively over a period of months to handle the myriad ways in which a research 
institution or degree level can be described. The pipeline processes cases in which just the name of 
the university is provided, or in which both the lab name and university name are given. Of course, 
we had to also account for common abbreviations as well as misspellings. There were also situations 
in which unrelated institutions in different countries had the same abbreviations. Similarly, global 
technology companies were listed with the country where the research was carried out in order to 
capture the geopolitical aspect of the technology. This processing was conducted for 12.7 million 
author names listed in the 2.2 million research papers covered by this report.
Visualisation
Graphs of the top 20 institutions show more than 20 when a tie occurs. For example, if the institutions 
ranked 19th, 20th, and 21st have the same score, the chart automatically shows 21 institutions. 
Likewise for the talent tracker visualisations, more than 10 distinct entities are shown if there is a 10th 
place tie in the sum of national talent across the undergraduate, postgraduate and employment levels.
63

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Entity resolution
The collection of bibliometric data is fraught with challenges in grouping publications from the same 
affiliations or institutions in the same group. Notably, there some are enormous institutions; for 
example, the Chinese Academy of Sciences has 116 institutes in various parts of China, which were 
grouped together. The Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), with 23 different institutions, was grouped. 
Similarly, institutions of the Russian Academy of Sciences were grouped together, as were institutions 
of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. In addition, some universities in the US were grouped as a 
system; for example, the University of California includes the 10 University of California campuses, 
including the University of Santa Barbara, University of California Berkeley and University of California 
Los Angeles. Within the institutions, tech companies such as Google, Microsoft, Intel and Samsung are 
visible, and the country is generally specified in order to differentiate between different locations. The 
European Space Agency was separated according to country affiliation but could have generated a 
larger count with all European countries and allies counted together.
The US Department of Energy (US DoE) has national laboratories affiliated with it, such as the Ames 
National Laboratory, the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the Los Alamos National 
Laboratory. The individual US national labs are kept separate in this report. Another challenge arose 
from papers using, for example, ‘Centre of Excellence for Additive Manufacturing’ instead of the 
affiliation or grouping. Similarly named affiliations such as ‘Harvard–MIT Center for Ultracold Atoms’ 
and ‘MIT–Harvard Center for Ultracold Atoms’ were group together. Well over 200 regex (regular 
expression) matches for institutions were used to accurately group publications from the same 
institution together.
For global tech companies, the companies were listed with their host country, differentiating between 
IBM (US) and IBM (Switzerland).
Technology definitions and stakeholder engagement
Technology definitions were based on the Australian Government critical technology list published 
August 2022 (with the odd minor deviation).231 We consulted with multiple governments (and often 
multiple departments and agencies within a government) and with other stakeholders on other lists 
and also on which technologies to focus on first. Much of this engagement also helped to feed into and 
inform different parts of this project. We thank those stakeholders for those very useful discussions. 
ASPI aims to continue to build, and improve, this program of work over the coming years, and that will 
involve adding more technologies to the Critical Technology Tracker, and possibly more features.
64 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
Appendix 3: Database search hits
Table 9: Database search hits and number of top 10% highly cited papers.
Technology Database hits Top 10%a
Advanced materials and manufacturing
1. Nanoscale materials and manufacturing 477,198 51,830
2. Coatings 10,612 1,209
3. Smart materials 30,782 3,309
4. Advanced composite materials 27, 56 4 2,879
5. Novel metamaterials 14,533 1,580
6. High-specification machining processes 11,266 1,309
7. Advanced explosives and energetic materials 5,659 694
8. Critical minerals extraction and processing 10,949 1,183
9. Advanced magnets and superconductors 6,241 706
10. Advanced protection 8,836 930
11. Continuous flow chemical synthesis 7,095 770
12. Additive manufacturing (incl. 3D printing) 22,583 2,353
Artificial intelligence, computing and communications
13. Advanced radiofrequency communications (incl. 5G and 6G) 40,803 4,273
14. Advanced optical communications 17,881 1,952
15. Artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and hardware accelerators 2,172 229
16. Distributed ledgers 23,140 2,467
17. Advanced data analytics 28,444 2,976
18. Machine learning (incl. neural networks and deep learning) 526,738 56,602
19. Protective cyber security technologies 23,610 2,557
20. High performance computing 13,313 1,424
21. Advanced integrated circuit design and fabrication 7,016 779
22. Natural language processing (incl. speech and text recognition 
and analysis) 40,987 4,539
Energy and environment
23. Hydrogen and ammonia for power 56,248 5,945
24. Supercapacitors 35,114 3,704
25. Electric batteries 88,362 9,270
26. Photovoltaics 118,248 12,526
27. Nuclear waste management and recycling 8,668 1,032
28. Directed energy technologies 12,713 1,378
29. Biofuels 51,457 5,457
30. Nuclear energy 19,412 2,257
Quantum
31. Quantum computing 18,732 1,932
32. Post-quantum cryptography 4,146 462
33. Quantum communications (incl. quantum key distribution) 6,173 679
34. Quantum sensors 16,691 1,771
65

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
Biotechnology, gene technology and vaccines
35. Synthetic biology 27,389 2,889
36. Biological manufacturing 127,852 13,471
37. Vaccines and medical countermeasures 65,856 7,204
Sensing, timing and navigation
38. Photonic sensors 110,122 12,342
Transportation, robotics and space
39. Advanced aircraft engines (incl. hypersonics) 3,275 356
40. Drones, swarming and collaborative robots 9,307 1,052
41. Small satellites 5,563 605
42. Autonomous systems operation technology 42,418 4,412
43. Advanced robotics 51,748 5,313
44. Space launch systems 871 95
Total 2,237,787 240,702
a Not exactly 1/10th due to papers with the same number of citations at 0.9 quantile cut point
66 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
Appendix 4: Flags
Country Flag Country Flag
Australia
 South Korea
Canada
 Malaysia
China
 Netherlands
Germany
 Russia
France
 Saudi Arabia
India
 Singapore
Iran
 United Kingdom
Italy
 United States
Japan
67

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
Notes
1 Visit the Critical Technology Tracker site for a list and explanation of these 44 technologies: techtracker.aspi.org.au/
list-of-technologies .
2 Australian Signals Directorate, ‘Intelligence partnerships’, Australian Government, 2023, online .
3 See ‘China’s science and technology v ision’ on page 14.
4 Demetri Sevastopulo, Kathrin Hille, ‘China tests new space capability with hypersonic missile’, Financial Times , 
17 October 2021, online.
5 Fergus Hunter, Daria Impiombato, Yvonne Lau, Adam Triggs, Albert Zhang , Urmika Deb, ‘Countering China’s coercive 
diplomacy: prioritising economic security, sovereignty and the rules-based order ’, ASPI, Canberra, 22 February 2023, 
online.
6 Fergus Hanson, Emilia Currey, Tracy Beattie, The Chinese Communist Party’s coercive diplomacy , ASPI, Canberra, 
1 September 2020, online; State Department, China’s coercive tactics abroad , US Government, no date, online ; 
Bonnie S Glaser, Time for collective pushback against China’s economic coercion, Center for Strategic and International 
Studies (CSIS), 13 January 2021, online ; Marcin Szczepanski, China’s economic coercion: evolution, characteristics 
and countermeasures, briefing, European Parliament, 15 November 2022, online ; Mercy A Kuo, ‘Understanding (and 
managing) China’s economic coercion’, The Diplomat, 17 October 2022, online.
7 Please see ‘list of technologies’ on the Critical Technology Tracker website https://techtracker.aspi.org.au/
8 Citation counts were used to slice off the top 10%, which resulted in a focus on 242,000 papers, or slightly more than 
one-tenth of 2.2 million due to papers with equal citation counts at the cut point. 
9 Mengyao Li, Jianxiong Ren, Xingyong Si, Zhaocai Sun, Pingping Wang, Xiaoming Zhang, Kunmeng Liu, Benzheng Wei, 
‘The global mRNA vaccine patent landscape’, Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics , 2022, 18(6), online.
10 M Johnson, J Belin, F Dorandeu, M Guille, ‘Interdependent factors of demand-side rationale for chemical, biological, 
radiological, and nuclear medical countermeasures’, Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness , 2020, 14(6), 
739–755, online; Mark R Hickman, David L Saunders, Catherine A Bigger, Christopher D Kane, Patrick L Iversen, ‘The 
development of broad-spectrum antiviral medical countermeasures to treat viral hemorrhagic fevers caused by natural 
or weaponized virus infections’, PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 8 March 2022, online.
11 Benjamin Brimelow, ‘How China is trying to fix the biggest problem plaguing its fighter jets’, Business Insider , 7 June 
2021, online; Robert Farley, J Tyler Lovell, ‘Why China struggles to produce an indigenous jet engine’, The National 
Interest, 2 September 2021, online.
12 Abraham Mahshie, ‘Dependence on Russian aircraft engines could prompt China to “fix their … problem”’, Air & Space 
Forces Magazine, 19 May 2022, online.
13 Thomas Newdick, ‘China’s J-15 naval fighter is now powered by locally made engines’, The War Zone , 23 November 
2022, online; Nyshka Chandran, Nancy Hungerford, ‘Rolls Royce chairman predicts: Chinese-made jet engines coming 
soon’, CNBC, 18 September 2017, online.
14 Ben Murphy, Chokepoints: China’s self-identified strategic technology import dependencies , Center for Security and 
Emerging Technology, May 2022, online.
15 Siemon T Wezeman, China, Russia and the shifting landscape of arms sales , Stockholm International Peace Research 
Institute, 5 July 2017, online.
16 James Purtill, ‘Australia is the world’s leading lithium producer. Why don’t we make electric vehicles?’, ABC News , 
9 February 2023, online .
17 James Purtill, ‘The world is hungry for solar panels. Why did we stop making them?’, ABC News , 19 September 2021, 
online.
18 ‘Rio Tinto to study using hydrogen in alumina refining in green push’, Reuters , 16 June 20212, online; Halvor Kvande, 
Per Arne Drabløs, ‘The aluminum smelting process and innovative alternative technologies’, Journal of Occupational 
and Environmental Medicine, May 2014, 56:S23-S32, online.
19 Diana Hicks, Anthony Breitzman, Kimberly Hamilton, Francis Narin, ‘Research excellence and patented innovation’, 
Science and Public Policy, October 2000, 27(5):310–320, online .
20 Stefano Breschi, Gianluca Tarasconi, Christian Catalini, Lorenzo Novella, Paolo Guatta, Hrannar Johnson, Highly cited 
patents, highly cited publications, and research networks , CESPRI – Bocconi University, December 2006, online .
21 F Poege, D Harhoff, F Gaessler, S Baruffaldi, ‘Science quality and the value of inventions’, Science Advances , 
11 December 2019, 5(12), online.
22 Cherng G Ding, Wen-Chi Hung, Meng-Che Lee, Hung-Jui Wang, ‘Exploring paper characteristics that facilitate the 
knowledge flow from science to technology’, Journal of Informetrics , 2017, 11(1):244–256, online.
23 Poege et al., ‘Science quality and the value of inventions’.
24 Mark P Carpenter, Francis Narin, Patricia Woolf, ‘Citation rates to technologically important patents’, World Patent 
Information, 1981, 3(4):160–163, online; MB Albert, D Avery, F Narin, P McAllister, ‘Direct validation of citation counts as 
68 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
indicators of industrially important patents’, Research Policy , 1991, 20(3):251–259, online; Bronwyn H Hall, Adam Jaffe, 
Manuel Trajtenberg, ‘Market value and patent citations’, RAND Journal of Economics , Spring 2005, 36(1):16–38, online .
25 Joshua Lev Krieger, Monika Schnitzer, Martin Watzinger, Standing on the shoulders of science , Harvard Business School, 
2022, online.
26 Krieger et al., Standing on the shoulders of science .
27 A Rodríguez-Navarro, R Brito, ‘The link between countries’ economic and scientific wealth has a complex dependence 
on technological activity and research policy’, Scientometrics , 2022, 127:2871–2896, online; Dr Samantha Hoffman, 
Kitsch Liao, Karly Winkler and Baani Grewel, Benchmarking critical techologies , ASPI, Canberra, 30 November 2021, 
online. 
28 ORCID (Open Researcher and Contributor ID), online .
29 The top 10% of papers within each publication year (2018–2022) were identified separately to avoid preferencing older 
papers that have had longer to accumulate citations.
30 Leo Egghe, ‘Mathematical theory of the h- and g-index in case of fractional counting of authorship’, Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 21 May 2008, online; Derek de S Price, ‘Multiple authorship’, 
Science, 29 May 1981, online.
31 Vladlen Koltun, David Hafner, ‘The h-index is no longer an effective correlate of scientific reputation’, PlosONE , 28 June 
2021, online.
32 G Van Hooydonk, ‘Fractional counting of multiauthored publications: consequences for the impact of authors’, Journal 
of the American Society for Information Science , 7 December 1998, online .
33 The H-index is calculated by first sorting a set of publications by the number of times each paper has been cited by 
another research paper. Scanning down this list, the H-index is the last row where the citation number is at least equal 
to the row number (see Table 2.1 for an illustration). JE Hirsch, ‘An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research 
output’, PNAS, 7 November 2005, 102(46):16569–16572, online .
34 Rodrigo Costas, María Bordons, ‘The h-index: advantages, limitations and its relation with other bibliometric indicators 
at the micro level’, Journal of Informetrics, 2007, 1(3):193–203, online.
35 Michael Schreiber, ‘Restricting the h-index to a publication and citation time window: a case study of a timed Hirsch 
index’, Journal of Informetrics, 2015, 9(1):150–155, online; Michael Schreiber, ‘A variant of the h-index to measure recent 
performance’, JASIST: Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 30 January 2015, online.
36 Dashun Wang, Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, The science of science , Cambridge University Press, 2021, online .
37 This approach normalises publications within each technology area; however, publications on the same technology 
can be across different fields. For example, machine-learning research is found in both computer science and medical 
fields. In computer science, the focus is often on improving algorithms, whereas in medicine the focus is often on 
real-world applications. If one country has more machine learning in computer science versus medicine, differing 
citation rates in those fields will affect the assessment.
38 Gangan Prathap, ‘Hirsch-type indices for ranking institutions’ scientific research output’, Current Science , 10 December 
2006, 91(11):1439, online.
39 Leo Egghe, Ronald Rousseau, Guido Van Hooydonk, ‘Methods for accrediting publications to authors or countries: 
consequences for evaluation studies’, Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 24 January 2000, online .
40 This was a pragmatic decision, as there are fewer ties further down the ranking (that is, in 10th place) using this metric. 
This is because the H-index is an integer (a whole number), whereas the proportion of the top 10% is a real number 
(a decimal number).
41 J Zhu, W Liu, ‘A tale of two databases: the use of Web of Science and Scopus in academic papers’, Scientometrics , 2020, 
123:321–335, online; K Li, J Rollins, E Yan, ‘Web of Science use in published research and review papers 1997–2017: a 
selective, dynamic, cross-domain, content-based analysis’, Scientometrics , 2018, 115:1–20, online.
42 ML Rethlefsen, S Kirtley, S Waffenschmidt et al., ‘PRISMA-S: an extension to the PRISMA statement for reporting 
literature searches in systematic reviews’, Systematic Reviews , 2021, 10(39), online.
43 Michael Ernst, letter to the editor, University of Washington Computer Science and Engineering Community, 29 May 
2015, online.
44 ‘Document types’, Web of Science, Clarivate, 2023, online .
45 Weishu Liu, ‘The changing role of non-English papers in scholarly communication: evidence from Web of Science’s 
three journal citation indexes’, Learned Publishing , 20 December 2016, online.
46 Alison Abritis, Alison McCook, Retraction Watch, ‘Cash bonuses for peer-reviewed papers go global’, Science , 10 August 
2017. online; Smriti Mallapaty, ‘China bans cash rewards for publishing papers’, Nature , 28 February 2020, online .
47 Research Unit for Science and Technology Analysis and Indicators, ‘Indicators 2021’, Digest of Japanese Science and 
Technology, National Institute of Science and Technology Policy, November 2021, online .
48 ‘The Global AI Talent Tracker’, MacroPolo, 2023, online.
69

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
49 Jeffrey Brainard, Dennis Normile, ‘China rises to first place in most cited papers’, Science , 17 August 2022, online; 
CS Wagner, L Zhang, L Leydesdorff, ‘A discussion of measuring the top-1% most-highly cited publications: quality and 
impact of Chinese papers’, Scientometrics , 2022, 127:1825–1839, online.
50 JE Hirsch, ‘An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research output’, PNAS , 7 November 2005, 
102(46):16569–16572, online.
51 Leif Engqvist, Joahim G Frommen, ‘The h-index and self-citations’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution , May 2008, 
23(5)250–252, online
52 Christoph Bartneck, Servaas Kokkelmans, ‘Detecting h-index manipulation through self-citation analysis’, 
Scientometrics, 11 November 2010, 85–98, online .
53 J Chakraborty, DK Pradhan, S Nandi, ‘Research misconduct and citation gaming: a critical review on characterization 
and recent trends of research manipulation’, in N Sharma, A Chakrabarti, VE Balas, AM Bruckstein (eds), Data 
management, analytics and innovation , lecture notes on data engineering and communications technologies, vol. 71, 
Springer, Singapore, 2022, online .
54 BBM Wong, H Kokko, ‘Is science as global as we think?’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution, September 2005, 20(9):475–476, 
online; M Khelfaoui, J Larrègue, V Larivière, Y Gingras, ‘Measuring national self-referencing patterns of major science 
producers’, Scientometrics, 2020, 123:979–996, online .
55 The Web of Science dataset provides a list of unique identifying numbers for the authors of each paper: Open 
Researcher and Contributor ID (ORCID). This allows for a Jane Doe conducting vaccine research at the University 
of Pennsylvania to be distinguished from a Jane Doe in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers conducting climate 
hazard research.
56 See Appendix 2, including Table 8, for additional details.
57 The sample was based on data availability and data quality, not random sampling. Therefore, our approach relies on 
complete case analysis. Rachael A Hughes, Jon Heron, Jonathan AC Sterne, Kate Tilling, ‘Accounting for missing data in 
statistical analyses: multiple imputation is not always the answer’, International Journal of Epidemiology , August 2019, 
48(4):1294–1304, online ; Paul Madley-Dowd, Rachael Hughes, Kate Tilling, Jon Heron, ‘The proportion of missing data 
should not be used to guide decisions on multiple imputation’, Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 2019, 110:63–73, online.
58 Alex Joske, Hunting the Phoenix: the Chinese Communist Party’s global search for technology and talent , ASPI, Canberra, 
20 August 2020, online.
59 Jiang Zemin, ‘The essence of science is innovation’, Reformdata.org , 5 August 2000, online ; ‘Footsteps of the 
republic—1995: Strategy for rejuvenating the country through science and education’, Xinhua , 29 September 2009, 
online.
60 Elsa B Kania, ‘Technology and innovation in China’s strategy and global influence’, in Scott D McDonald, Michael C 
Burgoyne (eds), China’s global influence: perspectives and recommendations , Daniel K Inouye Asia–Pacific Center for 
Security Studies, 2019, online .
61 Evan A Feigenbaum, The deep roots and long branches of Chinese technonationalism , Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 12 August 2017, online.
62 ‘Full Text of Hu Jintao’s report at 18th Party Congress’, Embassy of the PRC in Nepal, 18 November 2012, online .
63 Xi Jinping, ‘Secure a decisive victory in building a moderately prosperous society in all respects and strive for the great 
success of socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a new era’, Xinhuanet , 18 October 2017, online.
64 Zichen Wang, ‘Xi Jinping’s speech on science & tech on May 28, 2021’, Pekingnology , 9 June 2021, online.
65 ‘Circular of the State Council on printing and distributing “Made in China 2025”’, PRC Government, 8 May 2015 
(in Chinese), online.
66 Murphy, Chokepoints: China’s self-identified strategic technology import dependencies .
67 ‘’Why does everyone hate Made in China 2025?’, CFR , 28 March 2018, online.
68 ‘(Full text) The Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the State Council issued the “Strategic 
Planning Outline for Expanding Domestic Demand (2022–2035)”’, STCN , 14 December 2022, (in Chinese), online.
69 Barry van Wyk, ‘Made in China 2025 is back, with a new name and a focus on database companies’, The China Project , 
19 December 2022, online .
70 Karen Hao, ‘China’s Xi stacks government with science and tech experts amid rivalry with US’, Wall Street Journal , 
18 November 2022, online .
71 ‘Li Xiaohong: Strengthening the main position of enterprises in technological innovation’, People’s Daily , 26 December 
2022 (in Chinese), online.
72 For a full visual snapshot of all technologies, see Appendix 1.1.
73 Demetri Sevastopulo, Kathrin Hille, ‘China tests new space capability with hypersonic missile’, Financial Times , 
17 October 2021, online.
74 Andrew Davies, Coming ready or not: hypersonic weapons , ASPI, Canberra, 23 March 2021, online ; Richard Stone, 
‘“National pride is at stake.” Russia, China, United States race to build hypersonic weapons’, Science , 8 January 2020, 
online.
70 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
75 ‘Air, space and ocean have become the key areas of my country’s “13th Five-Year Plan” cutting-edge technology 
research and development layout’, Xinhuanet , 21 December 2016 (in Chinese) online; ‘The State Council issued the 
“Thirteenth Five-Year” National Strategic Notice on Development Planning of Emerging Industries’, PRC Government, 
29 November 2016, online; Mark Stokes, China’s evolving conventional strategic strike capability: the anti-ship ballistic 
missile challenge to US maritime operations in the Western Pacific and beyond , Project 2049 Institute, 14 September 
2009, online; Department of Defense, Military and security developments involving the People’s Republic of China 2015 , 
US Government, 2015, online; Mark A Stokes, China’s strategic modernization: implications for the United States , Strategic 
Studies Institute, 1999, online ; Wang, ‘Xi Jinping’s speech on science & tech on May 28, 2021’; Eric Tegler, ‘To develop 
hypersonic weapons, the US has to build some fiendishly complicated wind tunnels’, Forbes , 19 June 2020, online; 
Chris Young, ‘A new hypersonic wind tunnel will put China “20 to 30 years ahead” of the West’, Interesting Engineering , 
20 December 2021, online .
76 Tilla Hoja, Albert Zhang, Masaaki Yatsuzuka, ‘China’s militarisation of meteorological balloons’, The Strategist, 20 
February 2023, online .
77 ‘China’s military keeps rivals on edge with balloon strategy’, Financial Times , 5 February 2023, online .
78 Dafeng Cao, ‘A test using high-altitude balloon to launch the flight vehicle has been successfully performed, allegedly, 
this was exactly the test which closed a large area of airspace in the northwest of China’, Twit ter , 21 September 2018, 
online.
79 ‘China publicly and intensively tests “secret weapons”’, Toutiao , 23 September 2018 (in Chinese), online.
80 Graham Warwick, ‘The “parasol wing” design looks a bit like the Chinese Academy of Sciences’ I-plane hypersonic 
concept’, Twit ter, 22 September 2018, online; Jeffrey Lin, PW Singer, ‘China’s hypersonic aircraft would fly from Beijing to 
New York in two hours’, Popular Science, 26 February 2018, online ; Sibel Nicholson, ‘China’s hypersonic plane concept 
could go from Beijing to NYC in 2 hours’, Interesting Engineering, 7 March 2018, online; Kai Cui, Yao Xiao, YinXhou 
Xu, GuangLi Li, ‘Hypersonic I-shaped aerodynamic configurations’, Science China Physics, Mechanics & Astronomy , 
18 December 2017, 61:024722, online; Wang Haoxiang, Li Guangli, Yang Jing, Xiao Yao, Wang Xiaoyong, Xu Yingzhou, 
Xu Xiangui, Cui Kai, ‘Numerical study on flow characteristics of high-pressure capturing wing configuration at subsonic, 
transonic and supersonic regime’, Chinese Journal of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics , 2021, 53(11):3056–3070, online.
81 Listed on Google Scholar, online.
82 Quantum communication allows the distribution of secret keys (known as quantum key distribution or QKD) that 
are used to encrypt communications so they can’t be read by an eavesdropper. Quantum communication allows the 
detection of even the most skilled eavesdropper through error-rate analysis (known as key distillation). Quantum 
material is sent optically (fibre-optic cable or free space), as it’s based on the quantum properties of photons (light 
particles). Martin Giles, ‘Explainer: What is quantum communication?’, MIT Technology Review , 14 February 2019, online; 
National Security Agency, ‘Quantum key distribution (QKD) and quantum cryptography (QC)’, US Government, 2023, 
online; Martin Giles, ‘The US and China are in a quantum arms race that will transform warfare’, MIT Technology Review , 
3 January 2019, online; Yu-Bo Sheng, Lan Zhou, Gui-Lu Long, ‘One-step quantum secure direct communication’, 
Science Bulletin, 26 February 2022, 67(4):367–374, online.
83 Theresa Hitchens, ‘“Golden Age of SIGINT may be over”: new encryption foils IC eavesdropping’, Breaking Defense , 
23 July 2019, online.
84 Ellen Mitchell, ‘How US weapons and intelligence helped Ukraine’s rout of Russia’, The Hill , 16 September 2022, online.
85 Michal Krelina, ‘Quantum technology for military applications’, EPJ Quantum Technology , 6 November 2021, 8(24), 
online; ‘US official says China threat “critical”’, Taipei Times, 12 May 2022, online.
86 University of Science and Technology of China, ‘The world’s first integrated quantum communication network’, Phys.
Org, 6 January 2021, online.
87 Bob Yirka, ‘Using drones to create local quantum networks’, Phys.Org , 18 January 2021, online.
88 Karen Kwon, ‘China reaches new milestone in space-based quantum communications’, Scientific American , 25 June 
2020, online.
89 David Vergun, ‘China remains “pacing challenge” for US, Pentagon press secretary says’, Department of Defense, 
US Government, 16 November 2021, online .
90 Ross Pomeroy, ‘The Javelin is wrecking Putin’s army. Here’s how the anti-tank weapon works’, Real Clear Science , 
28 February 2022, online .
91 Sujai Shivakumar, Charles Wessner, Semiconductors and national defense: what are the stakes?, CSIS, 8 June 2022, 
online.
92 Thomas Withington, ‘AI cuts the clutter’, Asian Military Review , 7 April 2020, online.
93 Kwasi Mitchell, Joe Mariani, Adam Routh, ‘The future of intelligence analysis: a task-level view of the impact of artificial 
intelligence on intel analysis’, Deloitte Insights, 11 December 2019, online.
94 Brian Katz, The intelligence edge: opportunities and challenges from emerging technologies for US intelligence , CSIS, 
17 April 2020, online.
71

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
95 James Wilson, Paul R Daugherty, ‘Collaborative intelligence: humans and AI are joining forces’, Harvard Business Review , 
July–August 2018, online.
96 ‘Reducing the battery burden on the dismounted soldier’, Thales, no date, online .
97 ‘Assault on batteries—have soldier-worn power innovations stalled?’, Army Technology , 18 March 2013, online.
98 Matthew Kroenig, ‘International relations theory suggests great-power war is coming’, Foreign Policy , 27 August 2022, 
online.
99 Valerie Insinna, ‘US Air Force to start new experiments with Boeing’s MQ-28 Ghost Bat drone’, Breaking Defense , 
5 October 2022, online .
100 Spencer Ackerman, ‘Weird, birdlike mystery drone crashes in Pakistan’, Wired , 29 August 2011, online.
101 Tyler Rogoway, ‘Adversary drones are spying on the US and the Pentagon acts like they’re UFOs’, The Drive , 16 April 
2021, online.
102 James Vincent, ‘Watch a swarm of drones autonomously track a human through a dense forest’, The Verge , 5 May 2022, 
online.
103 Zhejiang University ranked well in advanced data analytics (9), machine learning (8), protective cybersecurity 
technologies (8), advanced integrated circuit design and fabrications (8), advanced optical communications (3), 
advanced radiofrequency communications (10), biological manufacturing (9), synthetic biology (4), photovoltaics (9), 
photonic sensors (5) and advanced robotics (6). ‘Zhejiang University’, China Defence Universities Tracker , ASPI, Canberra, 
2021, online.
104 Tong Li, Cong Li, Chungang Yang et al., ‘A mean field game-theoretic cross-layer optimization for multi-hop swarm UAV 
communications’, Journal of Communications and Networks, February 2022, 24(1):68–82, online .
105 Troy Carter, ‘Here’s the Army’s now-patented EMP rifle attachment for taking out small drones’, TechLink , 16 January 
2019, online; ‘The Lithuanian electromagnetic rifle that Ukraine uses to shoot down Russian drones’, Time News , 
17 October 2022, online.
106 JR Wilson, ‘The new era of high-power electromagnetic weapons’, Military + Aerospace Electronics , 20 November 2019, 
online; Courtney Albon, ‘US Navy, Air Force running “capstone test” of new high-power microwave missile’, Defense 
News, 1 July 2022, online.
107 David Hambling, ‘The US Navy Plans to foil massive “super swarm” drone attacks by using the swarm’s intelligence 
against itself’, Forbes , 26 August 2020, online.
108 Krystal Hu, ‘ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base—analyst note’, Reuters , 3 February 2023, online .
109 ‘ChatGPT: Optimizing language models for dialogue’, OpenAI, 2023, online .
110 570 Gb of written data (books, Wikipedia, etc.) with more than 300 billion words. Alex Hughes, ‘ChatGPT: Everything you 
need to know about OpenAI’s GPT-3 tool’, BBC Science Focus, 2 February 2021, online .
111 Jennifer Elias, ‘Google is asking employees to test potential ChatGPT competitors, including a chatbot called 
“Apprentice Bard”’, CNBC, 31 January 2023, online.
112 With the emergence of deep neural networks (DNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for machine-learning 
models, both logic chips and memory chips became important in determining the efficiency and speed of such 
networks. AI chips are so termed because they can be optimised for AI training and inference tasks at a much faster 
and efficient rate. Currently, AI chips include graphics processing units (GPUs), field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) 
and application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). The different AI chips give varying degrees of flexibility and speed. 
While CPUs are the logic gates of choice for general computing, further scaling down of CPU device size comes with 
increases in energy consumption and can’t keep up with the computer-intensive tasks required for AI. Neuromorphic 
computing chips are expected to expand current AI capabilities further.
113 Frederik Kelter, ‘The battle over semiconductors is endangering Taiwan’, Foreign Policy , 9 November 2022, online ; 
‘Focus: E. Asia chipmakers see high-tech decoupling with China inevitable’, Kyodo News , 20 November 2022, online ; 
Jane Lanhee Lee, ‘Report warns US chip design market share to plunge without government support’, Reuters , 
30 November 2022, online .
114 ‘TSMC university collaboration programs’, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation, no date, online .
115 David Schwartz, ‘Samsung doubles its spending on university research partnerships’, Tech Transfer Central , 4 August 
2020, online; Kim Eun-jin, ‘Samsung Electronics and KAIST join hands to foster semiconductor engineers’, Business 
Korea, 26 November 2021, online.
116 Imec, ‘Living its legacy: imec—independent R&D hub for nano- and digital technologies’, no date, online .
117 Imec, ‘Living its legacy: imec—independent R&D hub for nano- and digital technologies’.
118 ‘STMicroelectronics’, Wikipedia , online.
119 Ramiro Palma, Raj Varadarajan, Jimmy Goodrich, Thomas Lopez, Aniket Patil, SIA/BCG report: The growing challenge of 
semiconductor design leadership, Semiconductor Industry Association, 2022, online .
120 Palma et al., SIA/BCG report: The growing challenge of semiconductor design leadership .
72 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
121 ‘The CHIPS and Science Act: Here’s what’s in it’, McKinsey & Company, 4 October 2022, online ; ‘Fact sheet: CHIPS and 
Science Act will lower costs, create jobs, strengthen supply chains, and counter China’, The White House, 9 August 
2022, online; Victoria Cooper, ‘Explainer: The Chips and Science Act 2022’, United States Studies Centre, 11 August 2022, 
online.
122 Palma et al., SIA/BCG report: The growing challenge of semiconductor design leadership .
123 Chris Young, ‘Military intelligence redefined: Big Data in the battlefield’, Forbes , 12 March 2012, online.
124 Andrew McLaughlin, ‘BUILDING DATA—Inside the RAAF’s F-35 mission data programming capability’, Australian Defence 
Business Review, 26 April 2019, online.
125 Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham et al., TensorFlow: large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous 
distributed systems, Google Research, November 2015, online ; Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat et al., 
‘Bigtable: a distributed storage system for structured data’, ACM Transactions on Computer Systems , 26(2):1–26, 
online; Steven Vaughan-Nichols, ‘ByteDance, TikTok’s parent company, joins the Open Invention Network’, ZD Net , 
17 August 2021, online; Ada Wang, ‘A quick guide to Baidu Analytics’, Sinorbis , 5 January 2021, online; Min Jiang, ‘Search 
concentration, bias, and parochialism: a comparative study of Google, Baidu, and Jike’s search results from China’, 
Journal of Communication, 31 October 2014, 64(6):1088–1110, online.
126 The University of California system of schools comprises 10 campuses scattered across California. ‘University of 
California schools’, University of California, 2023, online .
127 Berkeley Lab - about, no date, online .
128 ‘Gross domestic product’, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2023, online .
129 ‘Four Asian Tigers’, Wikipedia, online.
130 ‘Who is leading the critical technology race? ’, Critical Technology Tracker, ASPI, Canberra, 2023, online .
131 Sarah Bauerle Danzman, Emily Kilcrease, ‘The illusion of controls: unilateral attempts to contain China’s technology 
ambitions will fail’, Foreign Affairs, 30 December 2022, online .
132 ‘Statement by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan on the new US–EU artificial intelligence collaboration’, The White 
House, 27 January 2023, online .
133 Saif M Khan, AI chips: what they are and why they matter, Center for Security and Emerging Technology, April 2020, 
online.
134 For more information, see Critical Technology Tracker, online.
135 ‘History of quantum mechanics’, Wikipedia , online.
136 Department of Industry, Science and Resources, Action Plan for Critical Technologies, Australian Government, 
17 November 2021, online; Fast Track Action Subcommittee on Critical and Emerging Technologies, Critical and 
Emerging Technologies List update, National Science and Technology Council, US Government, February 2022, online ; 
‘ Japan to invest in “specific critical technologies” to enhance economic security’, Japan News , 18 July 2022, online; 
Ministry of Defense, R&D vision: toward realization of multi-domain defense force and beyond , Japanese Government, 
2019, online.
137 ‘Science & technology trends 2020–2040: exploring the S&T edge’, NATO Science & Technology Organization, 2020, 
online.
138 Joseph Brookes, ‘“Different world” will constrain quantum collaboration beyond close allies: Chief Defence Scientist’, 
AuManufacturing, 23 February 2023, online .
139 Johnny Kung, Muriam Fancy, A quantum revolution: report on global policies for quantum technology , Canadian Institute 
for Advanced Research (CIFAR), April 2021, online .
140 This is an estimated figure quoted from the CIFAR quantum report. This includes US$10 billion for a national quantum 
laboratory. Brian Wang, ‘China will open a $10 billion quantum computer center and others also investing in quantum 
computing’, Next Big Future, 10 October 2017, online.
141 Scott Morrison, Melissa Price, ‘$111 million investment to back Australia’s quantum technology future’, joint media 
release, 17 November 2021, online.
142 Department of Industry, Science and Resources, ‘Australia’s vision for quantum’, Australian Government, 8 April 2022, 
online.
143 Mateusz Masiowski, Niko Mohr, Henning Soller, Matija Zesko, ‘Quantum computing funding remains strong, but talent 
gap raises concern’, McKinsey Digital, 15 June 2022, online.
144 Quantum Technology Monitor, McKinsey & Company, June 2022, online .
145 Kevin Kissell, Nicole DeSantis, ‘Expanding access to quantum today for a better tomorrow’, Google Cloud , June 2021, 
online.
146 Karmela Padavic-Callaghan, ‘IBM unveils world’s largest quantum computer at 433 qubits’, New Scientist , 9 November 
2022, online.
147 Nick Flaherty, ‘First room-temperature quantum computer in supercomputing centre’, EE News Europe , 2 June 2022, 
online.
73

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
148 ‘Quantum computational advantage with 216 squeezed-state qubits’, Xanadu, no date, online .
149 Mark Webber, Vincent Elfving, Sebastian Weidt, Winfried K Hensinger, ‘The impact of hardware specifications on 
reaching quantum advantage in the fault tolerant regime’, AVS Quantum Science , 25 January 2022, 4:013801, online ; 
Sascha Wilkens, Joe Moorhouse, ‘Quantum computing for financial risk measurement’, Quantum Information 
Processing, 18 January 2023, 22:51, online .
150 Erik Lucero, ‘Unveiling our new Quantum AI campus’, The Keyword, Google, 18 May 2021, online.
151 V Mourik, K Zuo, SM Frolov et al., ‘Signatures of Majorana fermions in hybrid superconductor–semiconductor nanowire 
devices’, Science, 12 April 2012, 336(6084):1003–1007, online; Piet W Brouwer, ‘Enter the Majorana fermion’, Science, 
25 May 2012, 336(6084):989–990, online ; Eugenie Samual Reich, ‘A solid case for Majorana fermions’, Nature , 6 March 
2012, 4483(132), online.
152 Esat Dedezade, ‘Microsoft’s new quantum computing lab in Delft opens its doors to a world of possibilities’, news 
release, Microsoft, 21 February 2019, online .
153 ‘Evidence of elusive Majorana particle dies—but computing hope lives on’, Nature , 12 March 2021, online; Arnout 
Jaspers, ‘Majorana meltdown jeopardizes Microsoft’s quantum computer’, Communications of the ACM , 11 March 2021, 
online.
154 This was done for the analysis in this report, but the data used for the Critical Tech Tracker website is unfiltered.
155 National Agenda for Quantum Technology, Quantum Delta Nederland, 2019, online .
156 State of quantum computing: building a quantum economy, Insight report, World Economic Forum, September 2022, 
online.
157 ‘Notice of the State Council on the printing and distribution of the Thirteenth Five-Year National Science and 
Technology Innovation Plan’ [国务院关于印发’十三 五’国家科技创新规划的通知], State Council, PRC Government, 
8 August 2016, online (translation: Center for Security and Emerging Technology, online ).
158 Zhong Han-Sen, Deng Yu-Hao, Qin Jian et al., ‘Phase-programmable Gaussian boson sampling using stimulated 
squeezed light’, Physical Review Letters , 25 October 2021, 127:180502, online .
159 Wu Yulin, Bao Wan-su, Cao Sirui et al., ‘Strong quantum computational advantage using a superconducting quantum 
processor’, Physical Review Letters , 25 October 2021, 127:180501, online .
160 Daniel Garisto, ‘China is pulling ahead in global quantum race, new studies suggest’, Scientific American , 15 July 2021, 
online; Barry C Sanders, ‘Quantum leap for quantum primacy’, Physics , 25 October 2021, 14:147, online.
161 Qiang Zhang et al., ‘Quantum information research in China’, Quantum Science and Technology, 2019, 4:040503, online .
162 Elsa B Kania, John Costello, Quantum hegemony? China’s ambitions and the challenge to US innovation leadership , 
Center for a New American Security, 12 September 2018, online .
163 ‘Notice of the State Council on the printing and distribution of the Thirteenth Five-Year National Science and 
Technology Innovation Plan’ [国务院关于印发’十三 五’国家科技创新规划的通知].
164 Qiang Zhang et al., ‘Quantum information research in China’.
165 ‘Secure quantum communication over 7,600 kilometers’, news release, Austrian Academy of Sciences, 19 January 2018, 
online; Juan Yin et al., ‘Satellite-to-Ground Entanglement-Based Quantum Key Distribution ’, Physical Review Letters, 13 
November 2017, online.
166 2022 Nobel Prize winner in physics for work on quantum entanglement, online .
167 Duncan Riley, ‘Half of organizations worry about quantum “harvest now, decrypt later” attacks’, Silicon Angle , 
20 September 2022, online .
168 Riley, ‘Half of organizations worry about quantum “harvest now, decrypt later” attacks’.
169 Bao Yan, Ziqi Tan, Shijie Wei et al., ‘Factoring integers with sublinear resources on a superconducting quantum 
processor’, arXiv, 23 December 2022, online ; Matthew Sparkes, ‘Quantum computers can break major encryption 
method, researchers claim’, New Scientist , 5 January 2023, online ; ‘Chinese researchers claim to find way to break 
encryption using quantum computers’, Financial Times , 4 January 2023, online .
170 ‘Security cryptography whatever. Has RSA been destroyed by a quantum computer???’, Buzzsprout , 6 January 2023, 
online; Bruce Schneier, ‘Breaking RSA with a quantum computer’, Schneier on Security , 3 January 2023, online ; Scott 
Aaronson, ‘Cargo cult quantum factoring’, Shtetl-Optimized , 4 January 2023, online .
171 David Binning, ‘Superconductors find new magnetism’, Mining Technology , 25 September 2008, online .
172 MM Egan, The role of timing in industrial control systems: a primer, Office of Scientific and Technical Information, 
Department of Energy, US Government, 27 October 2022, online ; Centre national de la recherche scientifique, 
‘Quantum sensors for GPS-free orientation’, Phys.Org , 10 November 2022, online; Sadra Bakhshandeh, ‘Quantum 
sensing goes bio’, Nature Reviews Materials, 22 March 2022, 7(254), online; Ronny Stolz, Markus Schiffler, Michael Becken 
et al., ‘SQUIDs for magnetic and electromagnetic methods in mineral exploration’, Mineral Economics , 26 July 2022, 
35:467–494, online .
173 Victoria Chernow, Steve Taub, Jon Laxmi, Rishi Ratan, ‘Living in a material world—how advanced materials are shaping 
the future of technology’, iqt: in-q-tel , 27 July 2021, online.
74 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
174 Subcommittee on Advanced Manufacturing, National Strategy for Advanced Manufacturing , Committee on Technology, 
National Science and Technology Council, US Government, October 2022, online ; ‘Notice of intent to issue FY22 
Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Technologies—Building Technologies Office multi-topic funding opportunity 
announcement’, New Jersey Institute of Technology, no date, online .
175 Australian Trade and Investment Commission, ‘Advanced materials manufacturing to the United States’, Australian 
Government, no date, online .
176 Mark Burnett, Paul Ashton, Andrew Hunt et al., Advanced materials and manufacturing—implications for Defence to 2040 , 
Defence Science and Technology Group, Department of Defence, Australian Government, no date, online .
177 David Castelvecchi, ‘Electric cars and batteries: how will the world produce enough?’, Nature , 17 August 2021, online.
178 Annie Lee, Mark Burton, ‘Lithium’s next big risk is grand supply plans falling short’, Australian Financial Review , 
16 January 2023, online.
179 ATSIC, The lithium-ion battery value chain: new economy opportunities for Australia , Australian Government, 2018, online .
180 Pedro Nicolaci da Costa, Tech talent scramble, International Monetary Fund, March 2019, online .
181 Gavin Brennen, Simon Devitt, Tara Roberson, Peter Rohde, An Australian strategy for the quantum revolution , ASPI, 
Canberra, 13 May 2021, online .
182 Lora Dimitrova, Sapnoti K Eswar, ‘Capital gains tax, venture capital, and innovation in start-ups’, Review of Finance , 
8 September 2022, online ; PwC, Effectiveness of tax incentives for venture capital and business angels to foster the 
investment of SMEs and start-ups , European Commission, 2017, online.
183 The Treasury, ‘Tax incentives for early stage investors’, Australian Government, no date, online ; Miranda Stewart, 
Venture capital taxation in Australia and New Zealand, working paper no. 02/05, Intellectual Property Research Institute 
of Australia, University of Melbourne, March 2005, online .
184 W Max Corden, ‘Dutch disease in Australia: policy options for a three-speed economy’, Australian Economic Review , 
28 August 2012, online; ‘Dutch disease’, Wikipedia, online.
185 ‘The government venture capital fund that boosted Israel’s start-up economy’, Apolitical , 7 June 2017, online.
186 Department of Industry, Science and Resources, ‘National Quantum Strategy: proposed framework’, Australian 
Government, October 2022, online .
187 Australian Research Council (ARC), ‘ARC centres of excellence’, 2023, Australian Government, online .
188 Morrison & Price, ‘$111 million investment to back Australia’s quantum technology future’.
189 Jared Mondschein, Rajat Roy, Vik Naidoo, ‘Our unis are far behind the world’s best at commercialising research. 
Here are 3 ways to catch up’, The Conversation, 4 May 2021, online; Department of Industry, Innovation and Science, 
Innovation precinct insights: guidance for innovation precincts , Australian Government, March 2019, online ; Morrison & 
Price, ‘$111 million investment to back Australia’s quantum technology future’; ‘Innovation precincts: four questions 
and a challenge’, The Kennedy Company, 26 July 2021, online.
190 For these examples, such an initiative could be progressed by the Quad’s Critical and Emerging Technology Working 
Group and, in the case of AUKUS, through Pillar 2 activities (advanced capabilities). ‘Fact sheet: Implementation of the 
Australia – United Kingdom – United States Partnership (AUKUS)’, The White House, 5 April 2022, online .
191 Department of Home Affairs, ‘Subclass 858: Global talent visa’, Australian Government, 2023, online .
192 Andrew Tillett, ‘Labor plans fix for “broken” migration system’, Financial Review, 22 February 2023, online .
193 ‘Commonwealth scholarships guidelines (research) 2017’, Australian Parliament, 15 December 2021 online ; 
‘’Commonwealth scholarships guidelines amendment (research)’, Australian Parliament, 10 December 2021, online .
194 As an example, in Australia, they’re far below at A$28,854 per year. Such a low rate makes it impossible for many to do a 
PhD and hence a lot of potential talent is missed. It also incentivises dropouts as life stages evolve and people require a 
living wage. Low scholarships entrench generational socioeconomic disadvantage, working against the social cohesion 
objective put forward by the Australian Government as the rationale for investment in critical technology alongside 
national security and economic prosperity.
195 Alex Joske, Picking flowers, making honey: the Chinese military’s collaboration with foreign universities , ASPI, Canberra, 
30 October 2018, online .
196 By Sean Rubinsztein-Dunlop, Mario Christodoulou, Sashka Koloff et al., ‘Are Australian universities putting our national 
security at risk by working with China?’, ABC News , 14 October 2019, online.
197 Joske, Hunting the Phoenix: the Chinese Communist Party’s global search for technology and talent .
198 University Foreign Interference Taskforce, Guidelines to counter foreign interference in the Australian university sector , 
Department of Education, Australian Government, 2021, online .
199 Nicholas Gordon, ‘Biden’s chip controls may force Chinese-Americans working in China’s semiconductor firms to 
choose between their citizenship or their job’, Fortune , 13 October 2022, online .
200 Sarah Kessler, ‘What is “friendshoring”?’, New York Times , 18 November 2022, online ; Elisabeth Braw, ‘Forget offshoring, 
2022 is all about “friendshoring”’, Australian Financial Review , 4 August 2022, online.
75

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
201 For example, in a sandwich PhD, the middle year of a three-year program is taken at a foreign partner university. 
This increases exposure to new ideas and approaches and strengthens ties between collaborating teams. Rebecca 
Andersson, ‘the sandwich model: a successful case of capacity building’, in Internationalisation of higher education— 
a handbook, vol. 1, 2017, online.
202 ‘Horizon Europe—the most ambitious EU research & innovation programme ever’, European Union, no date, online .
203 ARC, ‘National Intelligence and Security Discovery Research Grants (NISDRG) Program’, Australian Government, no 
date, online; Scott Maucione, ‘20 years in, IC is still funding innovative research grants’, Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence, US Government, 11 February 2021, online .
204 Future Fund, online.
205 Michael Park, Erin Leahey, Russell J Funk, ‘Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over time’, Nature , 
4 January 2023, 613:138–144, online ; Pierre Azoulay, Joshua S Graff Zivin, Gustavo Manso, ‘Incentives and creativity: 
evidence from the academic life sciences’, RAND Journal of Economics , 12 September 2011, online; Department for 
Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Advanced Research and Invention Agency, and George Freeman MP , ‘Research 
agency supporting high risk, high reward research formally established’, media release, UK Government, 26 January 
2023, online.
206 ARC, ‘NISDRG—intelligence challenges’, Australian Government, no date, online .
207 ARC, ‘NISDRG— national security challenges’, no date, online
208 Web of Science, Clarivate, online .
209 SN Thiboeau, G Bren, D Schaid, ‘microsatellite instability in cancer of the proximal colon’, Science , 7 May 1993, 
260(5109):186–819, online.
210 A MacFarlane, T Russel-Rose, F Shokraneh, ‘Search strategy formulation for systematic reviews: issues, challenges and 
opportunities’, Intelligent Systems with Applications , 15 September 2022, online ; Birger Hjørland, ‘Classical databases 
and knowledge organization: a case for boolean retrieval and human decision-making during searches’, JASIST: Journal 
of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 4 June 2014, online.
211 Ying Huang, Ruinan Li, Lin Zhang, Gunnar Sivertsen, ‘A comprehensive analysis of the journal evaluation system in 
China, Quantitative Science Studies, 2021; 2(1):300–326, online; Hepeng Jia, ‘Experts question China’s bid to create 
world-class journals’, Nature, 4 September 2019, online.
212 Fei Shu, Charles-Antoine Julien, Vincent Larivière, ‘Does the Web of Science accurately represent Chinese scientific 
performance?’, arXiv, online.
213 Fei Shu et al., ‘Does the Web of Science accurately represent Chinese scientific performance?’.
214 Liu Xiaomin, ‘An analysis of the development of Chinese STM journals in the past 30 years’, Quantitative Science Studies , 
2021, 2(1):292–299, online.
215 David Cyranoski, ‘China splashes millions on hundreds of home-grown journals’, Nature , 11 December 2019, online.
216 Wong & Kokko, ‘Is science as global as we think?’; Khelfaoui et al., ‘Measuring national self-referencing patterns of major 
science producers’.
217 ‘Document types’, Web of Science, Clarivate, online .
218 Daniel Sarewitz, ‘The pressure to publish pushes down quality’, Nature , 2016, 533(147), online.
219 MA Edwards, S Roy, ‘Academic research in the 21st century: maintaining scientific integrity in a climate of perverse 
incentives and hypercompetition’, Environmental Engineering Science , 1 January 2017, online.
220 IA Moose, ‘Chapter 1: Publish or perish: origin and perceived benefits: perceived benefits versus unintended 
consequences’, EE: ElgarOnline, 26 January 2018, online.
221 ‘World university rankings’, Times Higher Education , 2023, online.
222 R Adams, ‘Prospective university students “swayed by league tables”’, The Guardian , 5 April 2013, online.
223 TC Bergstrom, PN Courant, R Preston McAfee, MA Williams, ‘Evaluating big deal journal bundles’, PNAS , 16 June 2014, 
111(26):9425–9430, online ; M Dewatripont, V Ginsburgh, P Legros, A Walckiers, ‘Pricing of scientific journals and market 
power’, Journal of the European Economic Association , 1 May 2007, 5(2–3):400–410, online.
224 This is discussed further in section ‘Publishing in non-English journals’; ‘Chinese science citation database field tags’, 
Web of Science, online.
225 Guangyuan Hu, Lei Wang, Rong Ni, Weishu Liu, ‘Which h-index? An exploration within the Web of Science’, 
Scientometrics, 2020, 123:1225–1233, online .
226 BBM Wong, H Kokko, ‘Is science as global as we think?’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution, September 2005, 20(9):475–476, 
online; Wen-Chiao Lin, Chih-Wei Chang, ‘The influence of Chinese scholars on global research’, Scientific Reports , 
2022, 12:18410, online; M Khelfaoui, J Larrègue, V Larivière, Y Gingras, ‘Measuring national self-referencing patterns of 
major science producers’, Scientometrics , 22 February 2020, 123:979–996, online ; A Baccini, G De Nicolao, E Petrovich, 
‘Citation gaming induced by bibliometric evaluation: a country-level comparative analysis’, PlosONE , 11 September 
2019, online.
76 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
227 L Egghe, ‘Mathematical theory of the h- and g-index in case of fractional counting of authorship’, 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 21 May 2008, online; M Schreiber, 
‘A modification of the h-index: The h m-index accounts for multi-authored manuscripts’, Journal of Informetrics , July 
2008, 2(3):211–216, online.
228 JE Hirsch ‘An index to quantify an individual’s scientific research output’, PNAS , 7 November 2005, 102(46):16569–16572, 
online.
229 HM Grimm, J Jaenicke, ‘Testing the causal relationship between academic patenting and scientific publishing in 
Germany: crowding-out or reinforcement?’, Journal of Technology Transfer, 16 July 2014, 40:512–535, online; E Bourelos, 
B Beyhan, M McKelvey, ‘Is the prominent scientist the one who becomes an inventor? A matching of Swedish 
academic pairs in nanoscience to examine the effect of publishing on patenting’, Research Evaluation , 23 March 2017, 
26(2):144–156, online; D Meissner, Y Zhou, B Fischer, N Vonortas, ‘A multilayered perspective on entrepreneurial 
universities: looking into the dynamics of joint university–industry labs’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 
May 2022, 178:121573, online; R Veugelers, J Wang, ‘Scientific novelty and technological impact’, Research Policy , July 
2019, 48(6):1362–1372, online; U Finardi, ‘Time relations between scientific production and patenting of knowledge: 
the case of nanotechnologies’, Scientometrics , 14 July 2011, 89:37–50, online; Jiafeng Gu, ‘Spatial interactions and the 
commercialisation of academic patents: the Chinese experience’, Science, Technology and Society , 17 October 2022, 
27(4), online; TU Daim, G Rueda, H Martin, P Gerdsri, ‘Forecasting emerging technologies: use of bibliometrics and 
patent analysis’, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, October 2006, 73(8):981–1012, online.
230 ORCID, online.
231 Critical Technologies Policy Coordination Office, List of critical technologies in the national interest , Australian 
Government, August 2022, online .
Acronyms and abbreviations
AI artificial intelligence
AUKUS a trilateral security pact between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States
CCP Chinese Communist Party
EU European Union
GDP gross domestic product
IIT Indian Institute of Technology
IMEC Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (Belgium)
MIT Massachusetts Institute of Technology
NTU Nanyang Technological University
ORCID Open Researcher and Contributor ID
PRC People’s Republic of China
Quad Quadrilateral Security Dialogue
R&D research and development
SIA Semiconductor Industry Association
SQuID superconducting quantum interference device
STEM science, technology, engineering and mathematics
TSMC Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation
UC University of California
US DoE UD Department of Energy
USTC University of Science and Technology (China)
WoS Web of Science
77

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
78 Policy brief: ASPI’s Critical Technology Tracker : the global race for future power

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
Some previous ICPC publications
79

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
Home About He/C9/C11 Contact
© 2022 ASPI, Inc. All rights r eserv ed. Disclaimer Priv acy policy
Who is leading the
critical technol ogy ra ce?
Compar e Quad countries 4 against China in Quantum computing Ex pl ore the d a t a
or expl ore b y critical technol ogy
?
