
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Ensuring a trusted 5G 
ecosystem of vendors 
and technology
Rajiv Shah
Policy Brief
Report No. 30/2020

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
About the author
Rajiv Shah is a Fellow at ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre. He has worked in the cyber, intelligence and security business for more 
than 20 years, over which time he has seen the internet evolve from an academic curiosity to today’s hyperconnected world. He has held a 
broad range of senior leadership roles with major multinational companies and now also leads his own consulting business, MDR Security, 
providing expert advisory services to government and businesses to grow capacity and capability through building effective and mutually 
beneficial partnerships. He is also a regular speaker at industry conferences and contributor to industry publications.
Rajiv’s experience has spanned a broad range of business and technical domains, with roles that have included business analysis, 
technical architecture, program delivery, operational management, strategy, business transformation, client relationship management 
and more. He has spent time working in the UK and the US, and since 2011 has been based in Canberra, Australia.
Before joining the commercial world, Rajiv completed a PhD in quantum physics and retains a keen interest in mathematics and science.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks those government and industry stakeholders who made themselves available for discussions and openly shared 
their thoughts and perspectives, and ASPI colleagues who provided constructive comments on this report. The author also thanks all 
anonymous peer reviewers for their feedback. No specific sponsorship was received to fund production of this report. The work of ICPC 
would not be possible without the financial support of our partners and sponsors across governments, industry and civil society.
What is ASPI?
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute was formed in 2001 as an independent, non‑partisan think tank. Its core aim is to provide the 
Australian Government with fresh ideas on Australia’s defence, security and strategic policy choices. ASPI is responsible for informing the 
public on a range of strategic issues, generating new thinking for government and harnessing strategic thinking internationally. ASPI’s 
sources of funding are identified in our Annual Report, online at www.aspi.org.au and in the acknowledgements section of individual 
publications. ASPI remains independent in the content of the research and in all editorial judgements.
ASPI International Cyber Policy Centre
ASPI’s International Cyber Policy Centre (ICPC) is a leading voice in global debates on cyber, emerging and critical technologies, issues 
related to information and foreign interference and focuses on the impact these issues have on broader strategic policy. The centre has a 
growing mixture of expertise and skills with teams of researchers who concentrate on policy, technical analysis, information operations 
and disinformation, critical and emerging technologies, cyber capacity building, satellite analysis, surveillance and China ‑related issues. 
The ICPC informs public debate in the Indo ‑Pacific region and supports public policy development by producing original, empirical, 
data‑driven research. The ICPC enriches regional debates by collaborating with research institutes from around the world and by 
bringing leading global experts to Australia, including through fellowships. To develop capability in Australia and across the Indo ‑Pacific 
region, the ICPC has a capacity building team that conducts workshops, training programs and large ‑scale exercises for the public and 
private sectors.
We would like to thank all of those who support and contribute to the ICPC with their time, intellect and passion for the topics we work on. 
If you would like to support the work of the centre please contact: icpc@aspi.org.au
Important disclaimer
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in relation to the subject matter covered. It is provided with 
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering any form of professional or other advice or services. No person should 
rely on the contents of this publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional.
ASPI
Tel +61 2 6270 5100 
Email enquiries@aspi.org.au 
www.aspi.org.au 
www.aspistrategist.org.au 
 facebook.com/ASPI.org 
 @ASPI_ICPC
© The Australian Strategic Policy Institute Limited 2020
This publication is subject to copyright. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act 1968 , no part of it may in any form or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, microcopying, photocopying, recording or otherwise) be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
without prior written permission. Enquiries should be addressed to the publishers. Notwithstanding the above, educational institutions 
(including schools, independent colleges, universities and TAFEs) are granted permission to make copies of copyrighted works strictly for 
educational purposes without explicit permission from ASPI and free of charge.
First published September 2020. ISSN 2209 ‑9689 (online), ISSN 2209 ‑9670 (print)
Cover image: Illustration by Wes Mountain. ASPI ICPC and Wes Mountain allow this image to be republished under the Creative Commons 
License Attribution ‑Share Alike. Users of the image should use the following sentence for image attribution: ‘Illustration by Wes Mountain , 
commissioned by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute ’s International Cyber Policy Centre. ’
No specific sponsorship was 
received to fund production 
of this report

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Policy Brief
Report No. 30/2020
Rajiv Shah
Ensuring a trusted 5G 
ecosystem of vendors 
and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Contents
What’s the problem? 03
What’s the solution? 03
Introduction 04
What is 5G? 04
5G technology components 06
Overview of current 5G technology maturity 07
5G standards and interoperability 08
5G and cybersecurity 09
Vendor trust and security 10
The 5G vendor landscape 12
Market opportunities and barriers 13
Recommendations for developing the trusted vendor market 15
Take a graduated approach to risk assessment and mitigation 15
Regulate competition 15
Expand industry development policy and invest in key technologies 16
Encourage a more open network equipment market 16
Address RAN equipment supply 17
Invest for the future 17
Conclusions 18
Notes 19
Acronyms and abbreviations 19
02 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
What’s the problem?
5G will be the next generation of mobile telecommunications. There are differing views on how quickly 
it will become commonplace and exactly what form it will take, but it will ultimately transform much 
of what we do and how society functions. The trustworthiness, security and resilience of 5G networks 
will therefore be critical. A key part of this will be the partnerships that network operators form with 
vendors to provide and maintain the network infrastructure. There’s now a good understanding that 
5G will underpin critical national infrastructure in a way that previous telecommunication technologies 
don’t, and that supply‑chain trust and security are key national security issues. Australia and some 
other countries have eliminated specific vendors from their 5G supply chains, but the space is globally 
contested and there is no consensus on what happens next. There is a need for a trusted ecosystem 
of vendors, which may also bring enormous opportunities for states, including Australia, to develop 
sovereign 5G capabilities and grow their 5G market. However, barriers to entry and a lack of consensus 
among key 5G stakeholders across the public and private sectors are holding up progress towards 
these goals. 
What’s the solution?
It’s time to move on from debates about individual vendors to understand what a trusted ecosystem 
of 5G vendors and technology should consist of, what needs to be done to achieve that outcome 
and how we still manage the residual risks associated with vendors. Rather than looking at the 
trustworthiness of individual vendors as a binary yes/no decision at a particular point in time, 
policymakers and industry need to understand the spectrum of vendor risk and put in place measures 
to manage different levels of risk. The highest risk vendors can be excluded, but residual risks need to 
be understood and mitigated. The costs of insecure systems must be recognised and better explained. 
Governments need to work together to build an environment that promotes a resilient supply chain 
with a plurality of trusted suppliers to avoid the risk of operators putting all their eggs in one basket. 
If the security of one vendor is compromised, that shouldn’t compromise the whole network or all the 
networks. This will require initiatives to promote diversity and interoperability, including standards 
setting, testing and integration facilities, and regulation. If implemented correctly, this will not only 
improve cybersecurity but also provide an economic opportunity for industry. States need to find the 
most promising opportunities to develop key sovereign 5G capabilities, including in Australia, and take 
that same approach to other key enabling technologies in order to avoid similar supply‑chain security 
challenges in the future. The window of opportunity is open now, so we need to lead by taking action 
now and encouraging other like‑minded countries to follow and coordinate with us.
03

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Introduction
5G is a subject that seems to come up in almost every discussion about the future of technology. 
Numerous networks are already advertising 5G services, on the basis that they deploy new, more 
efficient 5G radios at the edge of the network. However, the real transformation, in which the major 
security implications arise, of a merged ‘core’ and ‘edge’ operating inside a cloud environment is yet 
to arrive. While there may be debates about how quickly the full 5G transformation will happen and 
what form it will take, there’s no doubt that it has the potential to transform much of what we do. As 
this technology becomes an integral part of our lives, the trustworthiness, security and resilience 
of 5G networks will become ever more critical. A key part of this is the suppliers who will build and 
maintain the network equipment, and this has led to numerous discussions about the trustworthiness 
of particular vendors and to some countries, including Australia, banning Chinese vendors such as 
Huawei and ZTE from their 5G network builds.
This paper aims to broaden the global discussion. Given that all 5G network operators will need to rely 
on vendor partnerships to build and operate their networks, what are the desired characteristics of the 
vendor ecosystem that supports operators and what practical policy options should be considered to 
help achieve that?
This paper is based on a review of existing global literature and interviews with key stakeholders 
from vendors, network operators and governments in Australia and overseas. The views of these 
stakeholders – across the public and private sectors – differed considerably in a range of areas. This, 
in itself, is a part of the problem– there is often not agreed consensus on key topics and therefore the 
right pathway forward. 
This report begins with a review of what 5G is, the current state of technology and rollouts, and 
the implications and considerations for the cybersecurity of 5G networks, and then looks at the 
current vendor environment, market opportunities and barriers to entry and diversity, leading to 
recommendations for the way forward.
What is 5G?
New generations of mobile technology come along about every 10 years, driven by increasing volumes 
of data, increased variety of data and the rapid velocity of change in types of data usage. The 5th 
generation, or 5G, the latest one, is starting to be implemented now and will ultimately replace the 4G 
networks that began to appear in 2010. However, existing technologies will probably still be with us 
alongside 5G for many years to come. Change between each mobile generation is not always a step 
change, and there have been incremental updates between generations. In fact, the first mobile data 
devices, including the first iPhone, used a technology called GPRS, which was sometimes referred to 
as ‘2.5G’.
The internationally accepted technical standards are set by an organisation known as the 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP1). As the name implies, this was originally for 3G mobile 
networks, but it’s taken the lead for 4G and 5G without an update of its name.
04 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
It’s generally accepted that true 5G networks require the implementation of at least R15 of the 3GPP 
standard.2 In simple terms, there are three key components of ‘real’ 5G:
1. Faster mobile broadband speeds: This is generally the most common public perception of 
5G—how many gigabits of speed can be provided to a mobile handset and hence how quickly 
you can download an ultra‑HD movie to your phone. However, this is unlikely to be what delivers 
transformational change in how we use mobile devices; nor will it provide the revenues to justify 
the investment made by network operators.
2. Ultra-reliable low-latency communications: These are needed for extremely time ‑sensitive 
and mission‑critical applications, such as remote factory automation and so on. It’s even been 
suggested that this could enable remote robotic surgery in which a surgeon is able to get real‑time 
feedback on how the patient reacts to steps taken and can reliably make changes that are 
implemented in real time.
3. Massive machine-to-machine communications: 5G networks will enable a much greater density 
of transmitting and receiving devices, especially if they’re sending small amounts of data. This 
will enable large‑scale monitoring, measuring and sensing applications in which large numbers of 
devices directly communicate with each other without human intervention—machine‑to‑machine 
communications. This is sometimes also referred to as the ‘internet of things’. While this is 
already starting to happen, 5G networks will enable exponential growth in the numbers of 
connected devices.
Other key features, depending on how networks are configured, can include ‘edge computing’, in 
which the equivalents of current cloud computing capabilities are brought closer to wireless devices to 
enable more rapid processing, and ‘network slicing’, in which different customers, applications, or both 
can have their own virtual slices of a common physical network.
In the underlying technology stack (see box), a key part of 5G network architecture is increased 
‘virtualisation’, in which more and more functionality is implemented in software, including even the 
underlying network topology. This enables greater flexibility and agility in how they will be used, but 
also, as we shall see, brings greater complexity and potential security vulnerabilities.
It would be fair to say that no one really knows what 5G networks will be used for—including the 
service providers who will need to commercialise and monetise them. However, it’s certain that they’ll 
drive ever more usage and reliance on mobile data networks, and in particular more and more critical 
applications, transforming our way of life in ways not yet even imagined. Of course, this isn’t unusual 
for new technologies—remember that the worldwide explosion in SMS messaging since the late 1990s 
came from an obscure engineering feature included in the 2G mobile specifications that was intended 
for network service messages.
05

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
5G technology components
At the conceptual level, a telecoms network consists of:
• a radio access network (RAN)—antennas and electronics that convert between the radio signals 
sent to and from wireless devices and the bits and bytes sent as signals on network cables and 
inside computer equipment
• a core network that manages and carries the network traffic between the mobile devices and the 
other computer and network components, and also authenticates and provisions services to users
• traditional ICT—routers, switches and servers that provide the data transport, storage, processing 
and logic.
Within each of these ‘black boxes’ are a huge number of electronic components, some of which are 
specialised for the functions of 5G, such as high‑density antennas and signal processing, and some of 
which are more generic (Figure 1).
Figure 1: A 5G network
The overall user experience is delivered by applications and services that run across the top of these 
components: different bits of software may run on different components of the system but work 
together to provide a seamless experience for the user. One of the differences in moving to 5G is that 
more and more will be done in software, and in order to provide the full experience the application 
service provider will need to run specific software on more parts of the network.
For example, today a messaging service such as WhatsApp requires specialised software running on 
the end‑user device and on the WhatsApp servers. Tomorrow, supporting remote surgical procedures 
via a 5G network may require software running on the radio access nodes and servers at the edge of 
the network to meet the response time requirements.
This virtualisation will enable greater service customisation, scale and optimisation. The standards 
even envisage ‘network slicing’, in which there may be a dedicated ‘slice’ across the whole system for 
a particular user group and application service—effectively, computational and network resources on 
every box reserved just for them.
06 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Overview of current 5G technology maturity
Preparations for 5G by telecommunications network operators are proceeding at pace. At the end 
of 2019, it was estimated that 348 operators in 199 countries had announced plans to invest in 5G.3 
However, implementation and take‑up have been slow to date. Only 77 operators have deployed 
5G technology, and 61 operators in 34 countries have launched services. Although only limited 
5G‑enabled devices are currently available, Ericsson estimates that there were 13 million users globally 
at the end of 2019, mostly driven by take‑up in Korea and China.4 The same report forecasts an 
estimated 2.6 billion active 5G subscriptions by 2025, but even that pre‑pandemic estimate would still 
be less than a third of all mobile subscriptions.
While a glance at advertising material might make you think that fully featured 5G networks are 
commonplace in many major countries, the advertising doesn’t tell you that those deployments are 
often only part of the overall 5G capability. Generally, operators have implemented radio interfaces 
that allow users to experience the faster mobile broadband speeds of 5G, but not other features. 
Even the radio interfaces are generally not using the cloud‑based radio processing included in the 
5G standards. Almost all currently deployed networks are built on top of existing 3G/4G networks 
(referred to as ‘NSA’, or non‑stand‑alone), which has allowed rapid rollout. That means that, while 
5G coverage may be limited (for example, to just parts of major cities in Australia), users can have a 
seamless experience when moving in and out of 5G coverage. Chinese mobile providers had previously 
announced plans to deploy a stand‑alone (SA) 5G network in the last quarter of 2019, but appear to 
have settled for an initial NSA deployment.
A full 5G core and SA network architecture will be needed to enable the other key features, such as low 
latency and massive machine‑to‑machine communications, and hence many of the transformational 
and mission‑critical applications. This will require significant new investment in an environment 
in which network operators have had low margins from their existing businesses, even before the 
pandemic. The last‑minute decision by China Telecom to change its deployment from an SA network 
to NSA probably confirms the challenges in implementing SA networks and the immaturity of the 
technology. That said, we are seeing some evidence of SA deployments this year despite all the 
disruption, for example with Telstra claiming to have made their network “standalone‑ready” in May 
20205, but it’s clear that the full concepts and designs for true next‑generation architectures and 
applications are still emerging. 
07

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
5G standards and interoperability
Looking at the current 5G standards, it’s clear that there’s much to be defined. The current 
widely‑implemented version of the 3GPP standard is R15, which really focuses on migration from 4G 
to 5G, and even for this operators have noted that different vendors have different approaches to the 
coexistence of the generations and to fallback from 5G to 4G when 5G isn’t available. The next version 
of the standard, R16, issued in July 2020, starts to look at specific use cases such as industrial internet 
of things applications and better power consumption, but we’ll need to wait for R17, the scope of which 
isn’t even confirmed yet, in order to define some of the more critical features.
A further complication is that the agreement of standards, once considered a very dry subject in which 
technical experts put their heads together and collaborate to get the best technical outcomes, has 
now become politicised. Some nation‑states have realised that there are advantages in influencing 
choices towards areas where they have expertise and technical leadership. This can help provide ‘first 
mover’ advantage in implementation and can also often deliver value from existing patents in the form 
of royalties (from manufacturers that make standards‑compliant products) that can be reinvested in 
R&D to maintain a leading position.
As an example, in May 2018, it appears that Chinese companies were pressured into backing a Huawei 
proposal over one from US rival Qualcomm, and Lenovo’s founder was forced to issue a statement 
denying the company had been unpatriotic and failed to back its compatriot in the final round of 
voting.6 This is hardly surprising, given that homegrown technologies are often a matter of national 
pride, and China has set an explicit goal of becoming ‘a standards‑issuing country’.7 The rewards for 
success in influencing the standards can be immense, in the form of both tangible, monetary rewards 
(licensing fees can be worth several billions of dollars a year to a company) and the intangible—the 
ability to influence how technology is used (see, for example, recent proposals by Huawei to the 
International Telecommunication Union for a ‘New IP’ internet architecture, which some have seen as 
an attempt introduce new, authoritarian‑friendly values8).
Therefore, standard setting has become a key to global power and influence, but Australia and other 
allies don’t appear to have recognised this and hence aren’t currently in a position to compete in 
this sphere.
Although 5G is based on an ‘open standard’ published by the 3GPP consortium there are still 
factors that work against easy interoperability. Apart from the usual engineering challenge that 
different engineers may interpret standards differently, the standards definition process may be 
being manipulated, and in any case lags well behind what vendors are developing and carriers 
are implementing. The challenges from immature technology and the standards processes are 
undoubtedly a factor driving carriers to prefer single‑vendor end‑to‑end solutions.
Although 3GPP , a body dominated by carriers and vendors, has become the de facto leader in mobile 
network standards, it is only one of a number of potential bodies. There is a potential overlap with 
the International Telecommunications Union which is an international member state, treaty based 
organisation, and there are also other competing standards bodies such as ISO and ETSI. Making a 
08 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
choice about how and where to develop standards has became a matter of values and geopolitics, 
often at the expense of technology considerations.
Some carriers have recognised these challenges, in particular in relation to radio signalling and the 
problems of getting different base stations to work together, and have established their own initiatives, 
such as the OpenRAN venture under the Facebook‑headed Telecom Infra Project. This initiative is 
intended to reduce the expense of providing internet and voice services by standardising the design 
and functionality of hardware and software in the RAN, increasing the number of companies that can 
supply components for the infrastructure that carries mobile traffic. There are a number of competing 
interests at play here: carriers and Facebook would like telecommunications in general to be cheaper; 
incumbents would prefer no increase in competition; and some states have interests in promoting 
national champions. Despite this, the OpenRAN initiative appears to be gathering momentum, with at 
least one global player, Nokia, recently committing to Open RAN interfaces9.
Another development has been the announcement by a number of global carriers, including Telstra, 
of the establishment of the 5G Future Forum, which intends to produce uniform interoperability 
specifications, develop public and private marketplaces to enhance access to technology and share 
global best practice.10
If these sorts of initiatives don’t succeed and the global 5G market ends up with different vendors 
dominant in different geographies, without clear standards and interoperability, there’s a very real 
risk of long‑term incompatibilities that will undermine many of the potential benefits. After all, it’s 
happened before—in the 1990s, the major US carriers chose a technology called CDMA, while the rest 
of the world followed the GSM standard.11 The current lack of a major US network equipment vendor 
is probably at least partially due to that bifurcation—US companies concentrated on developing a 
technology that no one else used and ended up in a technical dead end.
5G and cybersecurity
Why is cybersecurity seen as so critical for 5G networks? Because 5G isn’t just the next natural stage 
in the evolution of wireless networks. 5G is about more than movie downloads. The likely applications 
and use cases will become critical to the functioning of governments, companies and society, 
including cyber‑physical and safety‑critical systems that will rely on the network. Not only do we 
need to be concerned about the confidentiality of data and users on the network, but we also need 
to consider the impacts of an attacker potentially compromising the availability and integrity of the 
systems, including the risks of the attacker being able to take down the whole network at once.
Australian and many other governments have already identified telecommunications networks as 
critical national infrastructure that’s essential to the effective functioning of society and therefore 
requiring additional regulation and attention, and it’s easy to understand why.12 In Australia in recent 
months, we’ve seen the chaos caused by outages of electronic payment (EFTPOS) systems for a few 
hours, making it impossible for people to buy basic items because they’re unused to carrying cash.13 
Now imagine the impact of a smart city suddenly losing all traffic sensor data and the ability to control 
traffic lights. An attacker could cause major accidents by maliciously changing the data being sent 
09

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
to traffic lights. In fact, given some of the potential applications enabled by 5G, it could be possible 
to cause major disruption by more subtle changes. If applications such as remote driving of vehicles 
rely on ultra‑low latency, what would happen if an attacker introduced a small delay to some or all 
network traffic?
The increasing importance of the network, combined with the increased risk that a cyber breach will 
cause major real‑world consequences, means that the cybersecurity of 5G networks must be a critical 
consideration, planned and accounted for from the outset. Risk management approaches should 
also consider the more sensitive functions that are used by national security and law enforcement 
authorities, such as compliance with legislation on telecommunications interception and data 
retention, which may create additional security risks.
Building an understanding of 5G security requires integrating security and the 5G network architecture. 
Both suffer from a major skills gap in Australia14 and globally,15 so we would expect a major shortage of 
professionals with a detailed understanding of both, exacerbated by the fact that 5G architectures are 
complex and still evolving.
One example is the debates about the separation of the ‘core’ and ‘edge’ components of a 5G network. 
Can they be effectively segregated so that a threat in the edge can’t affect the core? Australian 
authorities say they can’t be effectively segregated, whereas UK authorities appear to be suggesting 
they can. Without getting involved in the details of the debate here, it’s likely that the true answer is 
that it depends on architectural choices and complex overall system‑level interactions. Concepts 
such as network slicing will make this even more complex. End users are given effective control and 
exclusive use of an end‑to‑end slice of the network, and attention will need to be paid to the security 
safeguards required to minimise the risk of them escaping their own virtual slice and getting access to 
other parts of the network.
Vendor trust and security
The issue of vendor trust and security has been prominent in discussions about 5G security. Australia 
and the US have announced decisions to bar certain vendors, the UK has been formulating a 
compromise approach,16 (although this seems to be still evolving) and active debates in Europe are 
seemingly close to reaching a conclusion.
The risks from using a particular vendor can be many and varied. Much commentary on the subject 
talks about hardware ‘backdoors’ being inserted by a vendor at the factory,17 but that’s probably 
not the biggest issue. In fact, it’s probably an unhealthy focus that can drive the debate onto specific 
component manufacturers, when the bigger risks probably come higher up the technology stack. 
A much more worrying vendor risk occurs when carriers are critically dependent on vendors for 
maintaining the quality of service and so give the vendors access to the live network for support and 
maintenance. The nature of 5G networks as ‘software defined everything’ also means that there are 
security risks throughout the network that can be hidden in the complexity of software—vulnerabilities 
that are deliberately introduced by the vendor, or that come from genuine errors and oversights.
10 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Different vendors have different approaches to and cultures of security. The extent to which they use 
approaches such as secure software development, system integrity validation and third‑party supplier 
checks can be a useful guide, as well as their approach to the reporting and patching of security issues.
However, the control and ownership of vendors, in particular those from nation‑states in which 
companies may be subject to extrajudicial direction, has, to date, been the main criterion used to 
measure vendor risk.18 This should be broadened to consider all sources of risk. As well as foreign 
ownership and control, vendor threats can come from insiders, such as rogue employees, even 
in a vendor from a trusted country, and also depend on the quality of the security culture and 
secure‑by‑design approaches used by a vendor. This leads to a spectrum of vendor risk levels that can 
be used to guide appropriate treatments. We can sensibly decide to exclude very high risk vendors, 
but since no vendor will be zero‑risk, other mitigation measures will be needed in addition. While, 
given the criticality of 5G networks, we should impose a high standard of cybersecurity control and 
risk management across the network even for the lowest risk vendors, additional measures may 
be needed for intermediate levels. It’s important that carriers understand these requirements and 
can factor the different security costs into their procurement decisions (so potentially avoiding the 
incentive to simply choose the cheapest supplier who isn’t excluded due to being very high risk).
Independent testing of vendor equipment may be of some use to assess and mitigate risk (see, for 
example the Huawei testing facility set up and used by the UK over the past few years), but it’s not just 
a matter of testing the product from the factory. For any software components, each new release will 
require retesting, and in a 5G world the software becomes the most critical layer. The public reports 
from the UK testing facility19 show a series of damning findings and a lack of any assurance that 
identified flaws are resolved effectively. This means that, at best, this approach can be only a small 
part of a broader strategy.
In some cases, architectural approaches can be used to mitigate the risk. For example, end‑to‑end 
encryption could be used to mitigate the risk that particular network equipment could have 
unnecessary access to user details and data on the network. However, if we look at the risk of an 
adversary seeking to completely disable a network, the vendor risk is much greater, as ultimately 
the end‑to‑end network works only if every component in the chain is working—RAN, core access 
and routing.
This means it isn’t just a matter of assessing and using a vendor with an acceptable level of risk. Any 
farmer will tell you to avoid monoculture—growing just one crop means that one disease can wipe you 
out overnight. Similarly, if a network is dependent on a single vendor and a vulnerability is found, the 
vendor becomes untrusted for some reason or the company collapses, the equipment will be almost 
impossible to replace, and entire networks can become at risk overnight.
Therefore, as well as vendor trust, we need to ensure vendor diversity and redundancy in design. 
Operators need to have confidence that multiple vendors’ equipment can interoperate, and ideally 
have multiple vendors’ systems in service for each major function. This will provide resilience and 
options to reduce dependence on a particular vendor if circumstances change. In a given carrier’s 
network, there should be at least two vendors for each key equipment type, and across the market 
there should be four or more viable suppliers considered acceptable to use. These are bare minimums 
11

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
from a competition policy and resilience perspective; from a long‑term resilience point of view, 
there should be as many vendors as possible, subject to ensuring that each has critical mass and is 
commercially sustainable in the long term.
The 5G vendor landscape
The dominant vendors in the 5G market are generally considered to be Huawei and ZTE from China, 
Nokia from Finland and Ericsson from Sweden. This is certainly the case in the 5G network equipment 
sector, although they have some competition from Samsung (Korea) for radio equipment and Cisco 
(US) for the network core. There’s more competition in the devices market and for switches and 
routers. The main market players are shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: The main 5G players
Source: Adapted with permission from James A Lewis, How will 5G shape innovation and security: a primer , Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
Washington DC, 2018, 4, online .
Figure 2 shows that Chinese companies are major players in the network equipment market, but not 
(yet) runaway leaders. Ericsson and Huawei have very similar shares of the RAN equipment market, 
and Nokia isn’t far behind, and for the evolved packet core Ericsson leads Huawei. The US is also 
starting to have a presence among market leaders in the core network, where much of the future 
growth is expected. All three network equipment categories show very strong concentration: only two 
or three non‑Chinese vendors in each category have any significant market share.
Considering the RAN in more detail, the OpenRAN initiative mentioned above is creating opportunities 
for new entrants. In January this year, O2, the Telefonica‑owned UK mobile operator, announced 
plans to engage new UK‑ and US‑based entrants, including Mavenir, DenseAir and WaveMobile, in 
an OpenRAN deployment.20 In November 2018, Vodafone revealed that it had issued a request for 
information covering tests for OpenRAN‑compatible solutions and received responses from seven 
12 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
vendors, only one of which (Samsung) appears in the list above; the others were a mix of US, French 
and Indian companies. Vodafone then ran a request for quote process for the deployment of OpenRAN 
across 100,000 sites on its European networks.
Down at the component level, there’s greater diversity. For specialised radio components, such as 
small cell antenna arrays and power amplifiers, European and US companies dominate, and for 
specialised field‑programmable gate arrays, which are essential for high‑power embedded processing, 
there are really only two major manufacturers: Intel and Xilinx, which are both US companies. 
This confirms that, if the US continues to enforce the listing of Huawei on the ‘Entity List’, and thus 
prohibit exports of US‑made components to it, there would be serious impacts on Huawei’s ongoing 
manufacturing capability, at least in the short to medium term.
If we look further up the stack to the services and applications layer, that’s where many critical 
applications will be implemented, which also provides an opportunity to reduce dependence on the 
network equipment (for example through end‑to‑end encryption). The use cases and applications are 
only now being defined and implemented, so it’s too early to identify the key players in this space, but 
it will be an important one in which to understand vendor trust and act accordingly.
Market opportunities and barriers
The 5G infrastructure spend was US$784 million in 2019 and is forecast to be US$47.8 billion in 2027.21 
This estimate didn’t account for the impact of Covid‑19, which is likely to cause some delays and 
cutbacks, but the market over the next few years is still likely to be highly lucrative as a whole, although 
the accessible RAN market may be less so due to the high market share of low‑cost Chinese vendors . 
While a significant portion of the revenue will go to the established players noted above, there are still 
opportunities for new entrants to gain significant revenue, given that the development and building of 
fully featured 5G networks is still at an early stage.
Compared to earlier generations of mobile technology, 5G offers more opportunities for new entrants 
to the market. This is because in 5G architectures a significant number of functions become virtualised 
and are implemented in software. This opens up opportunities for software solution providers 
unconstrained by the costs and timescales of bespoke hardware development—especially if they can 
write efficient, fast and reliable code to implement mission‑critical use cases. This world of ‘software 
defined everything’ means that innovative and potentially sovereign businesses have the opportunity 
to add trust and value at the software layer.
The RAN equipment market presents particular challenges—it traditionally requires specialist 
hardware for antennas, radio signal generation and reception, and signal processing. Significant 
investment and time are needed to develop new hardware for the new frequencies, higher speeds 
and more devices that 5G will need to support. However, the 5G architecture does mean that, even for 
radio processing that’s traditionally done using specialised hardware at the antenna site, signals can 
be digitised and processed in software at remote sites.
13

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
In other network equipment classes, there will still be barriers to entry. The established players can 
be expected to compete strongly to maintain market dominance. They’ll also use the immaturity of 
standards to persuade service providers that it’s lower risk to use a single end‑to‑end provider. From 
discussions with providers for this report, this could resonate, especially given consumers’ focus on 
service quality. Telecoms companies nowadays prefer to buy managed services from vendors rather 
than build and integrate systems themselves. This means that when there are service outages they 
have a ‘single throat to choke’ (their vendor’s), rather than having to referee finger‑pointing between 
vendors. A shortage of systems engineering skills has also been identified as a major barrier to 
enabling telecoms companies to consider developing multivendor environments, along with the 
challenge of needing to develop expensive interoperability testing facilities.
The third area of opportunity is in developing and running applications and services across the 
network to implement 5G use cases. In this case, the market for software to implement new 
applications is wide open, given that the applications have often not even been defined, or in some 
cases probably not even imagined yet. 22 However, we can still expect the leading network equipment 
vendors to compete strongly, given their obvious adjacency and the opportunity to grow their 
businesses. Revenue streams from network equipment sales, in addition to any state subsidies, can be 
used to fund major R&D budgets and aggressive pricing. Antidumping provisions are especially difficult 
to manage for software, given the low cost of production, and carriers will always have financial drivers 
to choose the cheapest option without necessarily paying heed to broader requirements for vendor 
diversity and risk management.
Established vendors, wherever they’re from, can be expected to promote the perceived benefits of 
their end‑to‑end integration, critical mass and established brand recognition. They may use their 
control of the platform to seek to set up trusted ecosystems (think of Apple iOS devices and the App 
Store) in the name of security and openness, while in practice setting up barriers to entry. We can 
also imagine groups of platform, software and hardware vendors from one country, with implicit or 
explicit encouragement from their government, looking to set up collective monopolies. Carriers will 
see advantages in single‑vendor solutions, in reducing performance risks, reducing their requirements 
for system integration skills etc. The challenge will be to persuade major carriers to look at the broader 
risk landscape, to be willing to integrate multi‑vendor solutions and to put faith in emerging companies 
for what would be expected to be a long‑term investment.
14 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Recommendations for developing the trusted 
vendor market
We’ve noted that there are significant opportunities for vendors from Australia and allied countries to 
develop critical technology. However, they face significant competition from established players with 
economies of scale, and in some cases direct or indirect foreign government support. Appropriate 
policy actions will be needed to overcome the barriers in order to open up genuine opportunity for a 
broader range of vendors and provide the diversity that we need to improve the security and resilience 
of our 5G ecosystem.
Take a graduated approach to risk assessment and mitigation
There is a need for appropriate market signals to encourage carriers to choose lower risk vendors. 
There’s already, in Australia and some other countries, an outright ban on very high risk vendors, 
but, given the spectrum of risk, regulation should also ensure that the increased security costs of 
choosing a higher risk option sit with the carrier, rather than, for example, national cyber authorities 
being responsible for extra costs as they seek to protect carrier networks against vendor threats and 
mitigate risk.
The Australian Cyber Security Centre should develop a comprehensive framework of recommended 
vendor risk ratings based on various factors. The ratings should be used to define mandated 
risk‑mitigation actions based on risks, which could include tailored levels of isolation, control and 
monitoring of any access that vendors are given to live networks for support and maintenance 
purposes, along with limitations on offshore managed service provision and offshore data storage. 
Another example could be ensuring that sensitive and critical functions (such as lawful interception 
and audit logging) are segregated and can be separately managed using highly trusted solutions 
independent of the main network equipment vendors.
Regulate competition
Competition and merger policy levers should also be used to ensure fair opportunity for new entrants 
by limiting consolidation, preventing cross‑subsidies of existing major vendors when selling new 
capabilities, and perhaps even mandating major vendors to subcontract a portion of the work. 
This could include identifying where companies may be receiving subsidies from nation‑state 
governments, and whether trade and international agreements provide remedies to address unfair 
competition impacts.
These restrictions should apply to all existing major vendors, not just those from high‑risk jurisdictions. 
It wouldn’t be an appropriate approach to just pick one or two ‘winners’ from the existing major 
European and US vendors—a rich, diverse, vendor pool is needed to ensure the long‑term resilience of 
our 5G networks.
15

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Expand industry development policy and invest in key technologies
We’ve seen that building 5G vendor diversity can also be an economic opportunity for Australia. 
Therefore, we should ensure that industry policy promotes this. While we have a strong start‑up 
culture, we need to ensure that successful companies are able to scale up rapidly to credibly compete 
and serve the global market.
Regulatory barriers that prevent or slow scale‑up should be identified and addressed, and action 
is also needed to address the problem of access to capital. The Australian Government should 
establish an investment fund that can fund key technologies critical to our national security. It could 
be modelled, for example, on the National Security Strategic Investment Fund set up by the UK.23 Its 
remit would probably be broader than the scope of this paper, but it could certainly help to support 
the scale‑up of 5G technologies. Another model to consider could be the recent proposal from a 
group of US senators for a US$1.25 billion proposal to fund new R&D and a multilateral project fund for 
5G technologies.24
Encourage a more open network equipment market
Given the desired objective of vendor diversity, we need to ensure that carriers have both the right 
incentives and the confidence to move away from the single‑vendor environment. To assist this, the 
government should establish, fund and manage an independent test facility for 5G networks. This 
should be fully modular to allow the testing of different components from different vendors (as an 
example of how this can be done, see, for example, the Open 5G Core project25). As well as enabling 
interoperability testing, this would also enable security and vulnerability research and testing at the 
overall 5G system level, which we’ve noted is currently a poorly understood area. Potentially, this could 
be a joint undertaking with other allied countries, such as Canada and New Zealand, to reduce costs, 
but we caution that it should be ensured that Australia is a major contributor to this and hence able to 
use influence to achieve our own national security objectives.
Consideration should be given to mandating that network providers use multiple vendors for key 
components. This may be difficult to implement, and network providers may have concerns over the 
burden that it imposes. However, doing so would go a long way towards overcoming the possibility of 
‘monoculture’ security risk. Other countries, such as the UK, have discussed going in a similar direction, 
and that may allow Australia to learn lessons from their experience and devise an appropriate 
approach for our circumstances.
We need to ensure active engagement with 3GPP on standards setting to avoid politicisation and 
ensure that choices that maximise overall security and resilience, and market opportunity for new 
entrants, are made. This will include the identification of the key use cases for priority development, 
seeking to avoid choices reliant on foreign patents, and preference for the best technical choices 
based on open standards and implementation. Current responsibility for such engagement is diffused 
among different organisations, so one organisation needs to be given the mandate and funding to lead 
this work.
16 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
We’ve noted the challenges with standards‑setting bodies, so, if engagement there doesn’t prove 
effective, there may be a need for local regulations to mandate open interfaces for the most critical 
functions, especially where they’re needed to provide the option to segregate critical functions to 
be carried out by sovereign vendors. As an example, for lawful interception, open internal interfaces, 
referred to as X1, X2 and X3, would allow the administration of warrants and the intercepted data to be 
partitioned securely. Ideally, we could seek to align such regulations with those of other like‑minded 
countries, but in the absence of agreement Australia may need to act alone in our own interest.
Address RAN equipment supply
Even though the RAN forms only one part of the overall 5G network, the small number of suppliers 
and its criticality to the overall availability of the network indicate that equipment supply should 
receive some focus from policy‑makers. Although it does not seem likely to lead to security or diversity 
benefits in the short term, if the OpenRAN initiative gains more momentum it will also provide 
opportunities for new entrants. Australia should work with allies and other countries that do not have 
domestic suppliers or interests in promoting their national champions to encourage further adoption 
of the OpenRAN standard to allow more vendors into this marketplace using appropriate combinations 
of grants and incentives to carriers to encourage them to adopt this standard. 
Invest for the future
Finally, action needs to be taken to prepare for the future to avoid a repetition of this situation 
with other emerging technologies. Australia needs to invest in developing and commercialising 
technologies for artificial intelligence, 6G, quantum computing and other emerging fields. In building 
the right skills pipeline, we should also address current perceived skills gaps. We need systems 
engineers who can design and build systems bringing together components and technologies from 
different companies.
17

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Conclusions
5G networks are the next generational uplift in mobile communications technology. They’ll enable not 
only fast speeds but more reliable, low‑latency communications and massive machine‑to‑machine 
communication, enabling new applications for which security will be critical. While there are significant 
identified risks to the privacy and confidentiality of data on the network, and the users, there are also 
risks from an adversary seeking to completely take down a communications network or compromise 
its integrity. There are a number of potential causes, but a significant one is trust in the vendors whose 
equipment is used. Various countries have made differing decisions on excluding specific vendors 
considered to be high risk, but the discussion needs to move on, as reliance on one or two ‘not high 
risk’ vendors will still create major security risks. Long‑term security and resilience depend on a diverse 
vendor ecosystem.
Fortunately, the technology and rollout plans for ‘real’ 5G are still developing, so now’s the time 
to take appropriate action. We recommend that urgent action be taken to identify opportunities 
for developing new capabilities, the barriers to market entry, and policy actions to encourage 
new entrants and build a diverse 5G vendor ecosystem. Table 1 summarises our findings 
and recommendations.
Table 1: Findings and recommendations
Market segment Barriers to entry Recommended actions
RAN equipment Timescales and costs for 
specialist hardware
Incentives to promote OpenRAN technology
Other network 
equipment
Telcos reluctant to integrate 
multivendor systems
Establish interoperability testing facility
Consider mandating multiple vendors in networks
Immaturity of standards Engagement with 3GPP standard setting
Local regulations where needed to promote interoperability
Lack of market incentives for 
more trusted suppliers
Graduated risk assessment and mitigation framework for vendors
Application software Competition and 
cross‑subsidies from 
network equipment vendors
Regulations to stop anticompetitive behavior and dumping
Start‑ups can’t scale up 
to be credible contenders 
for long‑term, large‑scale 
rollouts
Address regulatory barriers
Access to funding, including investment capital and targeted R&D 
grants
Market‑wide Lack of focus on developing 
strategically important 
technologies
Identify future areas, such as artificial intelligence and 6G, and 
build fundamental sovereign capability now
We should seek to work in coordination with our allies and other like‑minded countries for maximum 
impact. However, if we wait to first build global consensus it’s likely that we’ll miss the window of 
opportunity. Australia took the lead in making the decision to exclude the highest risk vendors and 
now needs to lead in taking the next set of actions required for the long‑term security and stability of 
5G infrastructure, and in parallel encourage others to work with us in this endeavour.
18 Policy Brief: Ensuring a trusted 5G ecosystem of vendors and technology

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Notes
1 For more information on 3GPP membership and activities, see About 3GPP home , 3GPP, 2020, online.
2 Release 15, 3GPP, 26 April 2019, online.
3 GSA market snapshot, January 2020.
4 Patrik Cerwall (ed.), Ericsson mobility report , Ericsson, November 2019, online .
5 https://www.itnews.com.au/news/telstra ‑readies‑its‑mobile‑network ‑for‑standalone ‑5g‑use‑547609
6 Ma Si, Cheng Yu, ‘Lenovo rebuts rumor it failed to back Huawei on 5G issues’, China Dai ly, 18 May 2018, online.
7 Lindsay Gorman, ‘The US needs to get in the standards game—with like ‑minded democracies’, Lawfare , 2 April 2020, online .
8 Martin Joseph, ‘Inside China’s controversial mission to reinvent the internet’, FT , 28 March 2020, online (paywall).
9 https://www.techradar.com/au/news/nokia ‑to‑integrate ‑open‑ran‑in‑2020
10 Jonathan Nally, ‘Telstra and other firms form 5G Future Forum’, Technology Decisions , 16 January 2020, online .
11 CDMA = code ‑division multiple access; GSM = global system for mobile communications.
12 Critical Infrastructure Centre, Australian Government, online .
13 Shoba Rao, Nicole Pierre, ‘Australian consumers hit by EFTPOS outage’, News.com.au , 11 July 2019, online.
14 AustCyber, Australia’s Cyber Security Sector Competitiveness Plan 2019 , 2019, online.
15 Kelly Hill, ‘5G deployment faces a skills gap’, RCR Wireless News , 4 April 2019, online .
16 UK Government, ‘Coronavirus (COVID ‑19): what you need to do’, Gov.UK , 28 February 2020, online .
17 See, for example, Peter Bright, ‘Bloomberg alleges Huawei routers and network gear are backdoored’, ArsTechnica , 5 January 2019, online .
18 Scott Morrison, Mitch Fifield, ‘Government provides 5G security guidance to Australian carriers’, joint media release, 23 August 2018, online .
19 ‘Huawei cyber security evaluation centre oversight board: annual report 2019’ UK Cabinet Office, 28 March 2019, online .
20 Bevin Fletcher, ‘UK’s O2 taps non ‑traditional vendors for O ‑RAN project’, FierceWireless , 16 January 2020, online .
21 ‘5G Infrastructure Market by Communication Infrastructure, Core Network, Network Architecture, Operational Frequency, End User & 
Geography ‑ Global Forecast to 2027’, MarketsandMarkets , Oct 2019, online .
22 As an example, in the late 1990s some companies made huge revenues from developing software to send short service messages around 2G 
networks—which was ultimately used for the explosion in SMS communication.
23 ‘British Business Bank launches £85m National Security Strategic Investment Fund (NSSIF) Programme to support development of advanced 
dual‑use technologies’, news release, British Business Bank, 31 July 2018, online .
24 Mark R Warner, ‘National security senators introduce bipartisan legislation to develop 5G alternatives to Huawei’, press release, 
14 January 2020, online .
25 https://www.open5gcore.org/
Acronyms and abbreviations
3GPP 3rd Generation Partnership Project
ICT information and communications technology
NSA non‑stand‑alone
R&D research and development
RAN radio access network
SA stand‑alone
19

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Some previous ICPC publications

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====

