
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
1 Industrial policy in Europe:
 past and future
Simone T agliapietra and Reinhilde Veugelers
1 Europe’s industrial policy debate: a brief history
The debate about industrial policy has traditionally been about the
role of the state in the economy, driven by difficult questions such
as: why and to what extent should governments intervene in steering
market mechanisms? When they intervene, how should they do it?
Should governments pick ‘winners’ to be supported?
Over time, Europe’s approach to industrial policy has evolved
depending on different political and policy cycles.
After the Second World War, when the process of European recon-
struction began, the focus was notably on the strategic industries of
coal, steel, electricity and railways. Between the early 1950s and the
mid 1970s, referred to as the heyday of industrial policy (Owen, 2012),
most European countries were concerned with closing the income gap
and reducing their dependence on the United States. During those
years, some European governments, most notably France, ventured
into interventionist, winners-picking sectoral policies, also defined as
vertical industrial policies. These policies targeted sectors thought to
be strategic and promising for the future, including steel, chemicals,
machinery, communications and technology, aircraft and nuclear
power. Europe went through a wave of nationalisation and strong
intervention involving state-owned enterprises and other state-pow-
ered initiatives. It was during this period that France, for example,
launched a programme to promote its national computer industry –
the ‘Plan Calcul’ – and engaged in ‘Grands Projets’.

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
14 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
The European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) was set up in
1952 with the goal of reducing overcapacity and modernising coal
production. This first European-level industrial policy was considered
a success, both in terms of outcome and coordination between partic-
ipating states. The ECSC provided an interventionist framework within
which national companies had to modernise.
The European Economic Community (EEC), established after
the ECSC, progressively reduced tariffs in European markets. The
first technology policy initiative at European Community level was
PREST (Politique de Recherche Scientifique et Technologique), aimed
at facilitating common European research projects. The motivation
for this initiative was fear of European technology lagging behind the
US. A notable milestone in this era was the Davignon Plan, adopted
in 1977, under which European-wide solutions were sought for the
so-called ‘sunset’ industries, while keeping national control of ‘sunrise’
industries, such as computers. It was in this context that the Airbus
consortium was established, as a European industrial alliance for the
production of aircraft.
The 1980s saw a new phase of liberalisation with market-oriented
industrial policies, limited to setting the right framework within which
economic processes could take place (horizontal industrial policy).
Countries liberalised markets, trying to avoid the government failures
of the typically vertical industrial policy and winner-picking initiatives
of the past.
At European level, the inefficiencies of uncoordinated national
industrial policies became clear, leading to the development of two
important instruments at EU level: the internal market and competi-
tion policy, including state aid. The Single European Act (1986) laid the
legal basis for affirmative action of the state in the area of research and
development. During this period, different initiatives were undertaken
at European Community level to promote cooperation on research and
innovation. One example was ESPRIT (European Strategic Programme
for Research and Information Technology), a five year-programme

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
15 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
focused on collaborative research with the aim of “bringing together
companies, universities and research institutes across Europe” with a
specific focus on information technology (Owen, 2012). ESPRIT was
born as an attempt to respond to the government-led initiatives that
the Japanese Ministry for International Trade and Industry undertook,
initiatives that successfully enabled Japan to catch-up quickly with the
United States as a technological and economic leader, particularly in
the field of semiconductors. ESPRIT is typically considered the precur-
sor of the European Commission’s framework programmes (starting in
1984), through which the Commission carries out science, technology
and innovation policy and collaborative research initiatives. The cur-
rent framework programme is Horizon Europe.
During the 1990s and early 2000s, liberalisation programmes
continued in Europe. A consensus emerged at EU level on the pref-
erence for a more holistic, integrated and ‘horizontal’ approach to
industrial policy. The role of the EU was to ensure the right framework
conditions, focusing on the use of internal market and competition
instruments, and stimulating R&D and innovation. This cumulated in
the 2000 Lisbon Strategy: a programme “to transform the EU into the
most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world
capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs
and greater social cohesion” (European Council, 2000). Its goal was to
implement a comprehensive strategy of structural reforms by boosting
innovation and investment in R&D and creating a more integrated and
competitive internal market.
2 Europe’s industrial policy revival
The Great Recession of 2008 marked the start of a new era, character-
ised by an industrial policy revival across Europe.
In 2012, the European Commission published a new industrial
policy communication, ‘ A Stronger European Industry for Growth and
Economic Recovery’ (European Commission, 2012), which started
from the premise that “Europe needs industry” and sets out a roadmap

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
16 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
for reindustrialising Europe, with the aim of “raising the share of
industry in GDP from the current level of around 16 percent to as much
as 20 percent in 2020” . Although the Commission stressed the need for
a comprehensive vision “mobilising all the levers available at EU level,
notably the single market, trade policy, SME policy, competition policy,
environmental and research policy in favour of European companies’
competitiveness” , the communication returned to a more targeted
approach, identifying six priority action lines, including key enabling
technologies, clean vehicles and smart grids. The communication was
followed by action plans for specific sectors, such as steel (European
Commission, 2013)1.
The increasing pressure to put Europe on a trajectory towards
climate neutrality and the need to respond to growing international
tensions added to the significance of this policy development. This has
been particularly the case since the adoption in 2019 of the European
Green Deal as Europe’s flagship programme or, as the European
Commission defines it, as its “new growth strategy”2. In March 2020,
the Commission presented a ‘New Industrial Strategy for Europe’ ,
built on the twin objectives of managing the green and digital tran-
sitions while avoiding external dependencies in a new geopolitical
context, especially with China considered a “systemic rival” (European
Commission, 2019). Among the key policy goals in the strategy were
securing the supply of clean technologies and critical raw materials,
stepping up investment in green research, innovation, deployment
and up-to-date infrastructure, and creating lead markets in clean tech-
nologies by making more strategic use of single-market regulations,
public procurement rules and competition policy.
On the day after the publication of the new strategy, the World
Health Organisation declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic.
1 See also Veugelers (2013).
2 See European Commission press release of 11 December 2019: https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_19_6691.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
17 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
That shock, with all the issues related to the emergency procurement
of personal protective equipment and vaccines, triggered a substan-
tial revision of the new industrial strategy, which came in May 2021.
The updated strategy centered on the strengthening of the resilience
of the single market. It did so by putting a strong focus on the need to
improve Europe’s “open strategic autonomy” in key areas including
health and green and digital technologies by diversifying international
partnerships, developing Europe’s strategic industrial capacities and
monitoring strategic dependencies (European Commission, 2021).
Since then, the issue of ‘open strategic autonomy’ has became more
and more central to Europe’s industrial policy debate, also as a result
of the war in Ukraine, the subsequent energy crisis and the overall
increase in international tension linked to the geopolitical decoupling
of the United States and China. At the core of this issue stand the risk
of supply disruption for critical items (including vaccines during a
pandemic, natural gas during a major energy crisis, and critical raw
materials and clean technologies during the green transition) and the
consequent quest for ‘de-risking’ .
This paradigm change first became evident with the European
Chips Act proposed by the European Commission in February 2022 to
address the shortage of chips during the COVID-19 crisis. The Act has
the double objective of improving the resilience of the semiconduc-
tor ecosystem in the EU to minimise future supply chain disruptions
and increasing Europe’s domestic capacity for chip production. It
rests on three pillars: research and innovation policies, subsidies for
cutting-edge chip manufacturing plants, and measures to monitor and
intervene in chip-supply crises. The Act seeks to attract foreign invest-
ment and coordinate with global partners (European Commission,
2022). Yet, it has also raised concerns about its emphasis on protec-
tionism and its potential to create competition distortions (Poitiers
and Weil, 2022).
When it comes to resilience in the face of supply risks associated
with the green transition, the European Commission published in

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
18 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
March 2023 two legislative proposals reflecting its new policy frame-
work in this area: the Critical Raw Materials Act (CRMA) and the Net-
Zero Industry Act (NZIA).
The CRMA is an attempt to respond to the supply disruption risk in
critical raw materials, mainly by boosting their domestic production,
refining and recycling. The proposed Act identifies a list of strategic
raw materials that are considered crucial for the manufacturing of
green, digital and defence technologies, and then sets precise domes-
tic targets to be achieved by 2030. The CRMA aims to make the issuing
of permits to relevant industrial projects subject to a common EU
deadline. The proposed act also includes provisions on supply chain
monitoring, stockpiling and improving the recyclability of CRMs. The
CRMA acknowledges that, while important, domestic actions will
never make the EU self-sufficient in critical raw materials. The Act
thus also puts forward an international strategy to diversify the EU’s
imports of critical raw materials and strengthen its global partnerships
with emerging markets and developing economies, and to consider a
‘critical raw materials club’ for like-minded countries.
The proposed NZIA meanwhile aims to tackle the supply disruption
risk in clean technologies by:
1. Listing the net-zero technologies that are considered to be strategic:
solar photovoltaic and solar thermal technologies; onshore wind
and offshore renewable technologies; battery/storage technologies;
heat pumps and geothermal energy technologies; electrolysers and
fuel cells; sustainable biogas/biomethane technologies; carbon
capture and storage (CCS) technologies; grid technologies.
2. Adopting an overall headline target of reaching a manufacturing
capacity for these technologies of at least 40 percent of the EU’s
annual deployment needs by 2030. It also proposes a target for an
annual injection capacity in CO2 storage of 50 million tonnes of
carbon dioxide by 2030, to spur the development of CCS.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
19 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
3. To achieve these targets, EU countries can identify Net-Zero Strate-
gic Projects (NZSPs) that will be granted priority status at national
level and fast-tracked in permitting procedures.
3 Europe’s industrial policy trilemma
The final shape of the NZIA and CRMA will ultimately emerge from the
EU legislative process, ongoing at the time of writing (Tagliapietra et al,
2023). However, both proposals are clearly underpinned by a de-risk-
ing approach, that has recently become an integral part of policy for
both the EU (Von der Leyen, 2023) and G73.
The historical discussion in section 1 shows how such concerns are
not new to Europe or the world. Discussions about the economic and
security challenges posed by China’s emergence as a global economic
power mirror the unease felt by European governments in the 1970
and 1980s about the technological leadership of the United States and
Japan.
Old industrial policy questions are emerging again, yet with a new
level of complexity because of the urgent need to move forward with
the green transition. In a globalised world grappling with the impacts
of climate change, industrial policy needs to address multiple objec-
tives, including global decarbonisation, world competitive economic
value and job creation, and strategic autonomy. When these objec-
tives conflict, they present policymakers with a challenging trilemma:
how to combine decarbonisation with economic growth and jobs and
world competitiveness, while also reinforcing resilience and sover-
eignty/autonomy/security of supply? What is the best way socio-eco-
nomically to achieve decarbonisation and resilience? How and how
far to go in moving towards sovereignity/autonomy/resilience, and
3 See Council of the European Union press release of 20 May 2023: https://www.con-
silium.europa.eu/fr/press/press-releases/2023/05/20/g7-hiroshima-leaders-com-
munique/.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
20 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
what does this means in terms of moving away from the traditional
economic efficiency paradigm? How far to move away from a hori-
zontal policy approach to shaping of framework conditions, such as
through strong competition policy and open trade? To what extent can
technologies and projects deemed to be strategic be selected, requir-
ing resilience/autonomy to secure supplies? How can these trade-offs
be minimised, for example by fostering technological innovation to
substitute critical inputs, rather than investing in expensive import
substituting local projects? How can resilience be turned into an
opportunity to create quality jobs and accelerate, rather than impede,
the decarbonisation process?
This book tries to tackle some of these difficult questions. In the
volume, a consensus emerges on the legitimacy and significance of
revitalising industrial policy. Authors agree that governments have
a pivotal role to play in managing the transition from fossil fuels
to low-carbon energy systems, while addressing social challenges.
Leaving the challenges to market forces is not an option in view of the
externalities and path dependencies that can slow down or inter-
rupt the course of private actions. The focus lies on the necessity of a
future-proof industrial policy infused with strong ‘green’ elements. The
question is what such an industrial policy should look like.
Although the details of such an industrial policy are not yet clearly
laid out, there is a consensus in this volume’s chapters that a mix of
policy instruments is needed. Effective industrial policies should
recognise the complementary nature of both supply- and demand-
side instruments, combining public support with regulatory frame-
works, target setting and carbon pricing. In the contributions, there is
a strong consensus that priority should be given to support for inno-
vation capacity building. Authors concur that governments can and
should shape technological progress in line with societal needs and
should enhance the skills of the workforce. The objective is to ensure
that industrial policies coexist with competition, facilitating struc-
tural change and business dynamics. Safeguarding competition and

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
21 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
enabling the entry of new firms to challenge less efficient incumbents
is crucial.
There is also agreement on the need for more directionality in
industrial policymaking. Ex-ante choices will have to be made about
technologies and projects that contribute most to the multidimen-
sional objectives, but which are impeded by market, system and transi-
tion failures, even if the risk of selection failures is high. Managing this
risk of government failure calls for a good mix of vertical and horizon-
tal instruments, bottom-up and top-down selection, limiting support
in time and the importance of ensuring competition as a level playing
field. Recommendations range from establishing agencies modelled
after the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA) to conducting complexity analysis of value chains, all with
the goal of developing flexible policies that can be evaluated regularly
and adjusted accordingly.
The success of industrial policy will be defined ultimately by
whether it succeeds in unleashing private-sector investment to meet
society’s targets in a globally competitive and resilient manner, putting
public-private partnerships at the core of industrial policymaking. The
authors in this volume call for explicit policies and continuous collab-
oration between firms and governments to establish objectives that
promote the creation of ‘good jobs’ .
Building coalitions at domestic and international levels, even
among countries that may be rivals in other areas, is of paramount
importance to navigate the green transition and other transformative
processes effectively. The regional dimension is particularly crucial
for a ‘smart industrial policy’ , whether focused on green initiatives or
not. While some argue that efficiency and a region’s inherent compar-
ative advantage should guide industrial policy, others caution against
straying too far from industry economics. Caution is also advised when
pursuing national interests through industrial policy, as this may trig-
ger an international race for subsidies, adversely affecting developing
countries and potentially accelerating deglobalisation. Overall, this

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
22 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Blueprint offers recognition of the benefits of an industrial policy that
supports international coordination and even cooperation, rather than
adopting a short-sighted Europe-first approach. These reflections are
addressed in different ways by the contributing authors, as follows:
Chapter 2, An innovation-driven industrial policy for Europe
(Philippe Aghion), asserts that industrial policy is essential for the
competitiveness of EU industry and to catch up with the technology
frontier. The core question is how to redesign the governance of indus-
trial policy to make it more compatible with competition and innova-
tion-led growth. Governments should focus support on skill-intensive
sectors or sectors subject to high competition, to stimulate produc-
tivity growth more efficiently. However, by subsidising incumbent
firms, governments should not deter new, higher-performing firms
from entering the market. The author also calls for updated interpre-
tations of the Stability Pact, competition policy and the single market,
and EU borrowing to enhance Europe’s investment capacity, make it
more competitive at the global level and avoid irreversible decline. The
author also advocates a European DARPA to ensure the competitive-
ness of EU industry, with projects funded from participating nations’
budgets and by joint-EU borrowing.
Chapter 3, Productivism and new industrial policies: learning from
the past, preparing for the future (Dani Rodrik), turns to the labour
aspect of industrial policymaking. The author proposes a new para-
digm of ‘productivism’ to enhance the productivity of all parts of soci-
ety through a collaborative effort involving government agencies and
private firms. Productivism focuses on incentivising worker-friendly
technologies and improving the quantity and quality of jobs available
for less-educated and less-skilled members of the workforce. Industrial
policies should encourage improvements on both the demand and
supply sides of the labour market. This requires customised and tar-
geted business incentives, and dialogue between government agencies
and companies to identify constraints and opportunities and design
interventions accordingly. To help create ‘good jobs’ , regional business

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
23 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
bureaux should be set up – or strengthened – to work alongside public
employment services to provide customised services to local firms and
investors.
Chapter 4, Industrial policy and technological sovereignty (Uwe
Cantner), focuses on the main driver of industrial policy at EU level:
innovation and how to assure that innovation works as driver for
industrial policy while assuring strategic autonomy or sovereignity
in technology. The chapter discusses what obtaining technological
sovereignty entails, what policies could be needed to achieve this, and
when it is better to leave it to the market. The chapter sets this discus-
sion in the context of relevant key technologies and of radical change
and innovation.
Chapter 5, Cooperation or conflict? A transatlantic look at whether
industrial policy will produce solutions or generate unmanageable
conflicts (Laura Tyson and John Zysman), outlines how international
collaboration among allies is essential for the success of industrial pol-
icies. The authors discuss the implications for the global economy and
the international political economic order of US industrial policies,
including the CHIPS and Science Act and green industrial policies. The
argue that the success of these policies will depend on US cooperation
with its allies, but the policies are likely to raise tensions precisely with
those allies, even though industrial policies need not disadvantage
foreign firms relative to domestic firms, and success will require allies
to adopt complementary policies. Meanwhile, building domestic coa-
litions for industrial policies and rewarding local constituencies may
generate conflicts between nations, whether allies or not. Competing
national industrial policies, while well motivated, can quickly lead to
counterproductive and wasteful bidding wars.
Chapter 6, Green industrial policy: the necessary evil to avoid a
climate catastrophe (Alessio Terzi), offers an economic-development
perspective on green industrial policy. The author considers industrial
policy an essential but imperfect tool to tackle climate change. Market
imperfections and distributional concerns imply that instruments

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
24 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
such as carbon pricing will be insufficient to ensure speedy decar-
bonisation. The use of industrial policy in the service of national
interest may lead to an international subsidy race, to the detriment of
developing countries. Moreover, policymakers need to be aware of the
negative effects of industrial policy on innovation, particularly at the
technological frontier. Protectionist approaches might slow technolog-
ical innovation in a time when speed is of the essence.
Chapter 7, Industrial strategies for Europe’s green transition (Chiara
Criscuolo, Antoine Dechezleprêtre and Guy Lalanne), postulates that
green industrial policy should go beyond carbon pricing and should
leverage the complementarities of supply- and demand-side instru-
ments. The current pace of innovation is too slow to face the challenge
of climate change; a range of barriers and market failures remain at
the root of the problem. To resolve these, a mission-oriented industrial
strategy for the green transition is needed. The authors suggest a tax-
onomy of industrial policy instruments to deploy in concert. Effective
green industrial policy should make strategic use of different policy
instruments supporting innovation and technology adoption, carbon
pricing and framework instruments (such as standards and regulations
and policies to encourage skills). Industrial policies are not necessarily
incompatible with competition and should be designed so that they do
not slow down structural change and business dynamics.
Chapter 8, A more globally minded European green industrial policy
(Ricardo Hausmann and Ketan Ahuja), further enlarges the scope of
the discussion by providing a Global South perspective on Europe’s
green industrial policy, illustrating how a more global European indus-
trial policy would be better suited to deal with the trade-offs the conti-
nent faces. The authors argue that Europe should not pursue a ‘Europe
first’ approach, but should only engage in strategic competition over
the parts of the value chain in which Europe holds a comparative
advantage. Bottom-up techno-economic cost modelling and eco-
nomic-complexity analysis of emerging clean supply chains can help
identify these parts. EU green industrial policy should also recognise

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
25 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
the economic reality of energy distribution, and relocate accordingly
the production steps that can be more efficiently decarbonised. This
means helping third countries build clean-tech value chains and
developing economic constituencies and political forces behind green
industries in Europe’s trading partners, to counterbalance fossil-fuel
interests that resist change in those countries. Finally, Europe should
focus on growing the overall global green economy and increasing
overall demand for the green products and services in which Europe
has a comparative advantage. A global green industrial policy would
benefit European workers, shareholders and consumers, as well as the
rest of the world.
Chapter 9, Europe’s green industrial policy (Simone Tagliapietra,
Cecilia Trasi and Reinhilde Veugelers), gives an overview of the
green industrial policy measures being implemented in Europe. The
authors argue that the current fragmentation of policy measures
calls for a new approach to green industrial policymaking at EU
level. A new and effective EU green industrial policy should aim at
an overall improvement in the attractiveness of the EU single market
as a location for green investment, via both horizontal measures
to enhance market functioning and specific measures in support
of clean technologies. Examples of these measures include better
regulation, better green procurement rules and EU-level financing to
promote new or earlystage clean tech, in which EU firms can achieve
sustainable competitive positions. An EU-scale green industrial policy
will require a stronger governance model to ensure better coordination
and longer-term commitment.
Chapter 10, Smart green industrial policy (Ben McWilliams and
Georg Zachmann), takes a regional development perspective to
illustrate how regions should develop a smart green industrial policy.
Drawing upon empirical and theoretical literature, the authors argue
that regions have unique technological, knowledge and institu-
tional capacities, and that these are a crucial indicator of the ability
of a region to absorb new knowledge. It is possible to identify these

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
26 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
comparative advantages at a regional level. Policymakers can map
desirable green technological capacities against existing regional
capabilities, and thus increase the likelihood that a region will respond
successfully to green industrial policy.
Chapter 11, Industrial policy for electric vehicle supply chains and
the US-EU fight over the Inflation Reduction Act (Chad Bown), exam-
ines how the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) of 2022, its implementing
regulations, policy decisions on leasing and potential critical minerals
agreements all have the potential to affect the electric vehicle supply
chain. This case study showcases the political-economic complica-
tions involved in US and EU attempts to cooperate over clean energy
transition policy to address the global externality of carbon dioxide
emissions. Electric vehicles are one example of the challenge facing
partners with integrated supply chains and similar levels of economic
development that share concerns about climate change, rising ine-
quality, workers, other social issues and democracy itself. The author
argues that the electric vehicles conflict laid bare the differing US and
EU prioritisation of these issues relative to economic efficiency, World
Trade Organisation rules, the approach to non-market economies and
national security vulnerabilities
Chapter 12, Developing a European industrial policy: lessons from
COVID-19 (Mathias Dewatripont), focuses on the innovation part of
industrial policy by bringing into the analysis Europe’s experience
with COVID-19 vaccines. While Europe has a solid foundation in the
health sector, it suffers from suboptimal coordination between parties,
especially between providers of funding. The author argues that the
EU should put in place a renewed support strategy for the develop-
ment and commercialisation of innovative technologies modelled on
DARPA. This approach would enhance competition, mix top-down
and bottom-up approaches, and support innovation while prioritising
affordability. Industrial policy should also aim at improving bargain-
ing positions through EU-wide coordination of negotiations with
pharma companies, to limit their ability to play countries off against

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
27 | SPARKING EUROPE’S NEW INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
one another. This would be valuable particularly for rare diseases, for
which pan-EU purchasing could offer higher sale volumes to compa-
nies and make lower prices more sustainable for the industry.
References
European Commission (2012) ‘ A
Stronger European Industry for Growth
and Economic Recovery Industrial
Policy Communication Update’ ,
COM/2012/0582 final, available at
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52012DC0582
European Commission (2019) Strategic
Outlook, JOINT/2019/5 final, available at:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/
EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A52019JC0005
European Commission (2020) ‘ A
New Industrial Strategy for Europe’ ,
COM/2020/102 final, available at https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0102
European Commission (2021) ‘Updating
the 2020 New Industrial Strategy:
Building a Stronger Single Market for
Europe’s Recovery’ , COM/2021/350
final, available at https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=COM:2021:350:FIN
European Commission (2022) ‘ A
Chips Act for Europe’ , COM/2022/45
final, available at https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:52022DC0045
European Council (2000) ‘Presidency
conclusions, Lisbon European Council, 23
and 24 March 2000’ , available at https://
www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_
data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/00100-r1.
en0.htm
Owen, G. (2012) ‘Industrial Policy
in Europe since the Second World
War: What Has Been Learnt?’ ECIPE
Occasional Paper 1/2012, European
Centre for International Political
Economy, available at https://www.
econstor.eu/handle/10419/174716
Poitiers, N. and P . Weil (2022) ‘Is the
EU Chips Act the right approach?’
Bruegel Blog, 2 June, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/blog-post/
eu-chips-act-right-approach
Tagliapietra, S., R. Veugelers and J.
Zettelmeyer (2023) ‘Rebooting the
European Union’s Net Zero Industry Act’ ,
Policy Brief 14/2023, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/policy-brief/
rebooting-european-unions-net-zero-
industry-act

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
28 | BRUEGEL BLUEPRINT 33
Veugelers, R. (ed) (2013) Manufacturing
Europe’s future, Blueprint Series
Volume XXI, Bruegel, available at
https://www.bruegel.org/book/
manufacturing-europes-future
Von der Leyen, U. (2023) ‘Speech on
EU-China relations to the Mercator
Institute for China Studies and the
European Policy Centre’ , 30 March,
available at https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/
speech_23_2063
