
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
February 2025 | u.S. FOre IGN POLIC y FOr CLeaN e Ner Gy T aSKFOr Ce
How the U.S. Can Stop Losing 
the Race for Clean Energy
Bentley Allan, Milo McBride, Noah Gordon, 
Daniel Helmeci, Jonas Goldman, Daevan Mangalmurti, 
Debbra Goh, and Leonardo Martinez-Diaz

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
How the U.S. Can Stop Losing 
the Race for Clean Energy 
Bentley Allan, Milo McBride, Noah Gordon, 
Daniel Helmeci, Jonas Goldman, Daevan Mangalmurti, 
Debbra Goh, and Leonardo Martinez-Diaz

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
The following paper is in support of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace’s U.S. 
Foreign Policy for Clean Energy Taskforce, a nonpartisan working group seeking to bolster U.S. 
clean industrial goals with cooperative decarbonization abroad. 
© 2025 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. All rights reserved.
Carnegie does not take institutional positions on public policy issues; the views represented herein are those 
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of Carnegie, its staff, or its trustees.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without 
permission in writing from the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Please direct inquiries to:
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
Publications Department
1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
P: + 1 202 483 7600
F: + 1 202 483 1840
CarnegieEndowment.org
This publication can be downloaded at no cost at CarnegieEndowment.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Contents
The Problem 1
Why Building Overseas 
Clean Energy Supply Chains Matters 6
What Success Looks Like 8
How to Achieve Success 15
Conclusion 19
About the Authors 23
Notes 25
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 32

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Over the past year, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace convened the U.S. Foreign 
Policy for Clean Energy Taskforce. This bipartisan group of twenty-three past and potentially 
future policymakers met monthly to explore how the United States could strengthen clean energy 
supply chains to enhance its security and prosperity. This paper summarizes for policymakers the 
key takeaways and recommendations from those taskforce meetings, as well as from the taskforce’s 
underlying analysis of supply chain and international relations. This summary was written by the 
Carnegie team, and none of its statements or recommendations may be attributed to any taskforce 
member. 
For more information on the project, please see the project hub, which includes the technical 
paper that provides analysis of clean energy supply chains; the foreign policy mapping paper 
that gives a detailed overview of U.S. diplomatic and financial engagement on clean energy; 
the assessment of opportunities for leapfrog technologies; and a paper providing detailed 
recommendations for American geopolitical strategy. The project hub also includes other 
publications by Carnegie scholars and taskforce members.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
1
1
The Problem
The rise of clean energy creates enormous economic and diplomatic opportunities for 
the United States, but also presents significant strategic and geopolitical challenges. 
We highlight three aspects of the problem: clean energy technologies are essential to 
America’s economic future, but competition is heating up, and the United States is losing 
the race to lead in new technologies. In this paper, we argue that a focused industrial 
strategy supported by international partnerships can help the United States compete for 
technological leadership in a new age.
The Rise of Clean Energy Is Inevitable
Solar, wind, and batteries are proliferating rapidly because they are now cost competitive 
or even cheaper than other options. These technologies have critical long-term advantages. 
They are thermodynamically efficient, creating free streams of electrons without 
combustion, and they can source those electrons from the local environment rather than 
through a complex fuel supply chain. Solar and wind therefore create economic advantages 
and enable countries currently dependent on fuel imports to reduce vulnerability. 
Even though global fossil fuel consumption is expected to continue, the area of highest 
growth is clean energy: annual global investment in clean energy is now nearly double 
fossil fuel investment.1 Grid-scale battery storage is also now being deployed at faster rates. 
In 2023, global battery storage installations nearly tripled compared to the previous year. 2 
In 2025, new batteries that can store days—not hours—of intermittent wind and solar 
energy are expected to be deployed.3 Intermittent renewables are becoming firmer sources 
of power for electric grids around the world.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
2 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
Additional clean energy advances are on the horizon. The cost of next generation geothermal 
power—which is clean and firm—is now falling as quickly as fracking and other renewables 
did.4 Nuclear, too, is having a renaissance because of its proven ability to provide twenty-
four seven power.5 And an arsenal of new technologies are being deployed to efficiently 
electrify heat in the industrial sector. 6 Across the United States, first of a kind cement and 
steel factories—some of the most challenging industries to decarbonize—are coming online 
without the need for fossil fuels.7
Electric vehicles (EVs) may prove the most disruptive of these technologies. EVs are not 
only more energy efficient than internal combustion engines (ICE) but are also reportedly 
cheaper to maintain because they have fewer moving parts. 8 Global ICE sales are now down 
23 percent from their peak in 2017, largely thanks to the unstoppable rise of EVs, especially 
in China and from Chinese firms.9 Once a constraint, the number of global EV chargers 
quadrupled from 2020 to 2023, and new chargers are being deployed that can top-up a 
vehicle in twenty minutes.10 By the end of the decade, EVs are projected to be cheaper than 
their ICE competitors without subsidies.11 The ICE age is thawing. 
Investment patterns reveal the depth of the shift to clean energy. Global annual investment 
in fossil fuels remains stagnant at around $1 trillion, whereas energy transition investment 
is growing annually at about 25 percent, surpassing an astounding $2 trillion in 2024. 12 At 
this rate, energy transition investment would be triple that of fossil fuels by 2026. Although 
initially concentrated in Western countries and China, this surge in clean energy investment 
is permeating across emerging and developing markets, with the majority of new power 
installations in these countries being clean. 13 The impact is already visible. Pakistan deployed 
17 gigawatts of solar panels in just nine months in 2024—surpassing Germany’s annual 
installations, a leading global solar market. 14 In 2024, both Türkiye and India were on pace 
to double their solar deployments compared to the previous year.15 Emerging markets, long 
thought to be a source of growth in hydrocarbon demand, are increasingly industrializing 
with clean energy.16
What does this mean for the United States, the world’s largest producer, refiner, and 
exporter of oil and gas? The Donald Trump administration has made clear that it will 
remove any potential restrictions on the supply of American hydrocarbons and withdraw 
regulations that may reduce domestic demand, such as fuel economy standards that 
disadvantage ICE vehicles vis-a-vis EVs.17 
But global demand may be a problem for plans to bolster oil and gas. Nearly every energy 
forecaster agrees that by around 2030, crude oil demand will plateau, with long-term 
consequences for U.S. exports and business opportunities abroad.18 One key driver is 
China’s transition to EVs. China’s gasoline consumption peaked in 2021 and is now down 
6.4 percent, with EVs constituting over half of all light-duty sales and an increasing share 
of heavy-duty vehicles.19 Both trends will continue to dampen oil demand in the world’s

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 3
largest market for crude oil.20 These trends also risk impacting emerging and developing 
markets: from Brazil to Ethiopia, staggering amounts of Chinese EVs are being sold in these 
countries, which could further impact fuel demand. 21 China is also piloting programs for 
sustainable aviation fuel and marine fuels that would decrease oil demand from those sectors.22 
There are also warning signs that the U.S. liquefied natural gas (LNG) boom could be short-
lived. While the United States’ export capacity for LNG is slated to double by the end of the 
decade, analysts have raised concerns that global LNG markets will be well supplied and 
demand is unlikely to match what the country hopes to unleash. 23 Countries may offer LNG 
deals to the United States as diplomatic negotiating tools, but this will not alter economic 
realities in power markets. Europe’s transition from Russian pipeline gas to the global LNG 
market can only happen once. In addition, developing countries including Pakistan and 
Cameroon are importing record quantities of Chinese solar panels, which unlike gas-fired 
power plants, do not require the constant exchange of scarce foreign dollars for energy imports.24 
Even if oil and gas demand persists above projections, the scale of clean technology growth 
and opportunity is too big to ignore. In the scenario where clean technologies are most 
aggressively deployed, annual global investment in low-carbon energy systems will exceed $6 
trillion by 2030, according to BloombergNEF.25 This is a market opportunity the United States 
cannot afford to let slip away; it should take clean energy technology and supply chains seriously.
The Global Competition for Developing and 
Deploying Clean Energy Tech Is Intensifying
Since the passage of the U.S. Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), other countries have continued 
to invest in their bids for technology leadership. Japan, South Korea, the European Union, 
and, of course, China all have industrial policies for solar, wind, and batteries, among other 
clean technologies.26 Indonesia, Mexico, Brazil, and India are working on new strategies 
designed to position their countries in clean energy supply chains. 27 India’s Production 
Linked Incentive scheme, which began before the IRA, has funneled billions of dollars to 
domestic solar, battery, and hydrogen production in pursuit of developing an industrial base 
and positioning India as an alternative clean tech producer to China. 28 Emerging economies 
such as Morocco, Vietnam, and Serbia have received investment from both China and 
Europe in the hopes of emerging as new energy middle powers.29
One clear indication of the transition has been the response of the Gulf states. While 
petroleum powers such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) continue 
to invest in the oil and gas that have made them rich, they also have serious economic 
diversification strategies focused on clean energy.30 Middle Eastern nations are making 
strategic investments in solar, financing projects in Indonesia and Egypt and building 
domestic manufacturing at home.31 These investments are pushing the limits of what clean 
power can deliver, as seen with the UAE’s recent gargantuan solar project that has enough

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
4 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
battery storage to provide round-the-clock power for local data centers.32 Over the rest of 
the 2020s, Saudi Arabia will invest more in renewable energy and clean hydrogen than in 
upstream oil and gas.33 Most interestingly, the Gulf states are investing in critical minerals 
extraction and processing projects. They understand that critical minerals will enable 
their capital to generate long-term wealth and hedge against the prospect of decreasing 
hydrocarbon rents.34 
Fossil fuels have strengthened the United States throughout history and especially in recent 
decades, as the shale revolution has turned the nation into the world’s largest oil and gas 
producer.35 But if investment in fossil fuels today comes at the expense of the investments 
necessary to win the global battle for clean energy, it would be shortsighted and risks locking 
the United States out of essential geostrategic technologies and minerals of the twenty-
first century. In the long term, it could risk rendering American energy assets outdated 
incumbents: stallions in the era of Ford’s Model T. 
Voices across the political aisle agree: the United States cannot cede leadership in the 
technologies of the future to China and other countries.36 China’s industrial strategy poses 
challenges not just to U.S. manufacturing but to long-term technological leadership and 
economic security. The United States must strategically and selectively compete through 
a comprehensive response that incorporates industrial policy, technology standards, and 
coordination with allies.
The U.S. Is Losing the Race to Produce the Technologies of the Future
The bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act recognized a fundamental truth: America’s 
prosperity and global position depend on technological leadership.37 But simply onshoring 
the production of incumbent chips, batteries, and reactors misses the point. The United 
States needs an innovation first policy that can pragmatically target products and processes 
of the future. With the IRA and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the United States has 
gained ground in the race for certain future technologies. However, it is still miles behind 
China and other countries in critical areas such as minerals and subcomponents. 38 China 
intends to be the clean tech hegemon of this century, and it is deploying the resources to 
get there.39 Table 1 shows that China’s global market share has grown in most supply chain 
segments since 2021.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 5
Table 1. Change in China’s Share of Global Manufacturing Capacity Since 2021*
T echnology Stage
 Change in China’s 
Share Since 2021
 China’s 
2023 Share
 Solar Modules Increase 81%
 Wind Nacelles Increase 68%
 Batteries Cells Increase 82%
Electrolyzers Stack Assembly Increase 68%
Heat pumps Final Assembly Decrease 39%
SAF Production Capacity Decrease 17%
CCUS Total Installed Capacity Consistent 10%
DAC Total Installed Capacity Consistent 0%
Low Emissions Steel Production Capacity Consistent 32%
Low Emissions Aluminum Production Capacity Consistent 62%
Alternative fuel ships Ship Assembly Increase 53%
Low Emissions Ammonia Production Capacity Increase < 10 %
Geothermal Annual Installations Consistent 0%
Nuclear Annual Installations Increase 57%
Source: “Energy Technology Perspectives,” International Energy Agency, November 2024, https:/ /iea.blob.core.windows.net/
assets/93db951b-afae-48fd-a2f8-bce22f24c625/EnergyTechnologyPerspectives2024.pdf; Carnegie analysis of IRENA, BNEF, 
World Nuclear Association, DNV, Global Energy Monitor, Mission Possible Partnership, and U.S. Department of Energy data. 
Note: Geothermal and nuclear “Annual Installation” figures are based on a forward-looking five-year annual average of installations. 
Table 1 includes information on end-stage manufacturing capacities. For a full assessment of upstream components, please see the 
related publication, “Assessing Progress in Building Clean Energy Supply Chains: The Technical Paper of the U.S. Foreign Policy for 
Clean Energy Taskforce.”
While the United States is still a world leader in primary innovation—generating new 
science and new technologies—it continues to lag in commercializing new technologies, 
getting things built, and maintaining a manufacturing and industrial base. 40 There is an 
enormous opportunity at stake. U.S. firms are currently innovating breakthrough energy 
technologies across sectors—from batteries to clean baseload power—that could put the 
country back in the race for these cutting-edge systems of the future. The United States’ 
powerful venture capital ecosystem cannot bring new products to market while rebuilding 
the industrial base on its own.41 
To push ahead in this race, the United States needs a bipartisan industrial policy that is 
consistent across presidencies and Congresses. This industrial policy should diversify supply 
chains to reduce overreliance on any foreign nation. It must focus on leapfrog opportunities 
where the United States can win in developing the next generation of technology, rather 
than trying to compete across the board. And it will require the United States to work with 
foreign partners who will make win-win deals that make America stronger.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
6 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
Why Building Overseas Clean 
Energy Supply Chains Matters
The United States must build clean energy supply chains abroad to achieve the following 
four goals.
Create Geopolitical Leverage 
U.S. global leadership hinges on taking a forward-looking approach to international 
diplomacy. China has built up strong global relationships through its overseas investments 
and by delivering good products at a low price. By investing in clean energy supply chains, 
it both secured a strong position in critical supply chains and curried favor with numerous 
countries.42 The United States and its allies must respond. To be effective, the response 
must mobilize large amounts of capital to deliver real economic and development value 
to developing and emerging economies. This means allowing countries to exercise their 
sovereignty and gain a genuine foothold in global value chains. The United States must be 
able to offer other countries what they demand, which in many places is not just oil and gas 
but also clean energy technologies, including nuclear, geothermal, and batteries. 
Bolster National Security with Dual Use Technologies 
Many clean energy technologies have military applications. 43 Lithium-ion batteries, for 
example, are essential to a modern military force. 44 Drones provide a vivid example: the 
small, cheap, quiet, and agile fighting units are a critical capability enabled by electric 
technology like batteries and magnetic motors (also two primary components in EVs).45 
Advanced nuclear microreactors and geothermal systems could help ensure that U.S. 
military installations are resilient, prepared, and not subject to fuel cutoffs. The United 
States cannot allow the electrification of military force to be led and controlled by other 
states. It must lead in the frontier of such dual use technologies and sufficiently de-risk the 
supply chains for these elements.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 7
Develop Knowledge that Supports Long-Term, 
Broad-Based Economic Growth
Whether the language used to describe it is “energy dominance” or “energy abundance,” 
investment in clean energy technologies and their supply chains creates economic spillovers 
that benefit the whole economy.46 America has prospered in the past by leading energy and 
technology revolutions, not by propping up old systems.47 Investment in new technologies 
and their supply chains will create economic spillovers that benefit the whole economy. For 
example, an offshore wind industry creates demand for steel alloys, ships, and rare earth 
magnets, while a battery industry could unlock know-how in advanced material production. 
The countries that benefit from new technologies secure strong industrial positions. 
The United States can lead in next generation energy technologies with smart, strategic 
investment in leapfrog opportunities today.
Reduce Reliance on Foreign Powers and Secure Energy 
Autonomy in the Long Term
Developing clean energy technologies provides an insurance policy in a world where future 
oil and gas demand is clouded by China’s rise as a clean tech empire. The United States 
already has significant clean power in place or under construction, and continued access 
to these resources and technologies will support U.S. energy generation in the long run, 
especially to ensure the scale of power needed for AI’s explosive load growth.48 Supporting 
the supply chains for these technologies, at least up to a level appropriate to their potential 
significance to U.S. economic and security interests, is smart policy.49
In short, strategic work on overseas supply chains will generate geopolitical, national 
security, economic, and insurance benefits. The first Trump administration made 
progress on this issue: working with Congress on the International Development Finance 
Corporation (DFC), initiating tariffs to protect American manufacturing, and sounding 
the alarm on America’s critical mineral vulnerabilities. 50 The Joe Biden administration 
built on this legacy by accelerating domestic manufacturing and expanding bilateral and 
multilateral engagement on mineral security and technological cooperation. This legacy can 
be continued by reinvigorating U.S. strategy for overseas technology development.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
8 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
What Success Looks Like 
To achieve these four, interlinked goals, the United States needs to combine domestic 
industrial policy and international collaboration to build supply chains and advance leapfrog 
technologies. Knowing when to onshore (bring production home), friendshore (bring 
production to trusted partner countries), or develop a new competitive technology pathway 
requires a strategic framework that identifies strengths and weaknesses.
Onshoring and Friendshoring
The United States should onshore when it has existing economic strengths (most 
importantly, an industrial base, a trained labor force, and valuable intellectual property), 
high domestic potential to economically produce a technology, or critical national security 
interests in the technology. The United States should friendshore when it simply cannot 
produce the material (for example, many critical minerals) or when creating competitive 
economic advantages would be onerous (such as where the United States lacks the tacit 
knowledge or cost-effective industrial base to compete). For example, while the United States 
can and will mine more metal for energy technologies—the Trump administration aims to 
make the United States the “leading producer” of minerals51—it simply lacks the reserves 
and expertise to onshore all needed production.52 It will need to friendshore nickel, copper, 
graphite, and other key metals but must do so in a focused, strategic manner.
Onshoring is also limited by the fact that all modern technologies have global value chains 
because knowledge about how to produce and innovate is highly localized and therefore 
distributed across countries. While the United States seeks to manufacture solar panels and 
batteries, it cannot do this without learning from partners and potentially even adversaries. 
Many U.S. solar and battery projects, for example, are led by Korean, Japanese, and 
European firms.53 If U.S. firms are to be internationally competitive, some will need to work 
with foreign companies to transfer the knowledge domestically. Figure 1 illustrates where 
the United States has, over the past two administrations, enacted bilateral diplomatic efforts 
for clean energy technologies and measures the number of sectors covered in each country.
This taskforce’s research on supply chain resilience also helps to calibrate the level of 
ambition that should be pursued in onshoring and friendshoring. The United States should 
go all-in for some technologies, and merely hedge for others. To compete, the United States 
must choose strategic priorities, rather than trying to compete across all segments. 54 This 
helps avoid spreading resources too thin while maximizing potential technologies with high 
levels of opportunity.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 9
Figure 1. Mapping U.S. Clean Energy Foreign Policy 
Diplomatic Efforts Across 14 Clean Energy Supply Chains Span the World with Regional Anchors
Source: Compiled documents from the White House Briefing Room, U.S. Department of Energy, U.S. Department of State, U.S. 
Department of the Treasury, Office of the United States Trade Representative, U.S. Trade and Development Agency, U.S. Agency for 
International Development. 
Notes: Sample size includes forty of the world’s largest economies relevant across clean energy supply chains. This map is illustrative; 
boundaries, names, and designations used do not represent or imply any opinion on the part of Carnegie or the authors. Dotted lines 
represent approximate disputed boundaries and contested territory..
In strategic areas, the United States should identify targets for onshoring and friendshoring 
that create sufficient resilience against geopolitical shocks (for example, onshore 50 percent 
of expected demand and friendshore 50 percent). In less strategic areas, targets could be 
lower (for example, 30 percent domestic plus 30 percent friendshoring). This will allow the 
United States to focus its energies where it has existing innovation advantages that could 
translate to manufacturing strengths and, eventually, durably competitive industries.
Leapfrogging
A second critical strategy is to develop leapfrog plays. Rather than trying to catch up to 
China in current generation technologies (such as conventional solar panels and lithium-
ion batteries), the United States should focus on developing and commercializing next 
generation technologies where supply chains and market dominance are not yet established. 
This would leverage the United States’ innovation advantage while helping secure a leading 
edge in the industrial base for clean energy production. In some instances, leapfrogging 
could entail circumventing supply chain risks—like making solid-state batteries that do 
not need Chinese graphite—or unlocking new potential from a technology vertical, like 
geologic hydrogen or supercritical geothermal resources.55

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
10 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
This strategy entails bolstering investment in research and development (R&D) for emerging 
technologies such as solid-state batteries, next generation geothermal, and advanced nuclear 
reactors. Second, it requires developing sector-specific know-how, expertise, and regional 
ecosystems where new advancements can be tested in sandboxes. Third, innovative financing 
and derisking measures will be needed to address the “missing middle” of bringing first-of-a-
kind pilots to demonstration scale.56 Lastly, and most importantly, it will entail creating the 
demand-pull policies needed to accelerate commercialization of these new technologies both 
at home and abroad. 
Identifying the Optimal Strategy for Each Clean Energy Technology
Based on supply chain and economic analysis, table 2 demonstrates how different technology 
verticals score based on five key questions:
• Domestic industrial potential: Does the United States have (or is it developing) an 
industrial base to manufacture this technology? 
• Supply chain resilience: What is the extent of supply chain risk at the present 
time? 
• Innovation opportunity: Can domestic industries innovate new systems that are 
close to reaching the market and can they result in competitiveness? 
• National priority: To what extent does this technology have national security and 
macroeconomic spillovers? 
• Global net-zero market: What is the potential size of the global market opportuni -
ty for this technology in a net-zero scenario?

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 11
Table 2. Identifying Strategies for U.S. Clean Energy Success: Maintain, Onshore, 
Friendshore, or Leapfrog?
 Domestic
 Industrial
Potential
 Supply Chain
R
esilience
 Innovation
Opportunity
 National
Priority
 Global
 Net-Zero
Market Strategy
Solar Medium Low Medium Low Low
 Friendshore: Develop a supply chain
for silicon ingots and wafers that cir-
cumvents China in places such as Viet-
 nam, India, and the Gulf states; expand
 commercial ties in the Quadrilateral
 Security Dialogue (Quad) plus South
 Korea for perovskite solar cells.
 Wind Medium Medium Medium Low Low
 Onshore: Maintain domestic onshore
 production while expanding offshore
 to promote domestic supply of alloys,
 magnets, and ships.
Battery High Low High High Medium
 Leapfrog and Friendshore Upstream:
 Promote next generation tech, such as
lithium metal and long duration stor-
 age at home and abroad to phase-out
 Chinese tech; expand Mineral Security
Partnership (MSP) for chokepoints.
Magnet Medium Low High High Low
 Onshore and Leapfrog: Onshore
 processing and metallization through
 public procurement and domestic
 content and continue research and
 development (R&D) for non–rare earth
element magnets.
Heat Pump Medium High Low Low Low
 Maintain: Design incentives for heat
 pump producers to procure metals
 from domestic and allied sources
 and advance domestic labor force for
installations.
Electrolyzer Low Medium Low Low High
Friendshore: Focus on proton ex-
 change membrane (PEM) technology
 and foreign policy for iridium in South
 Africa and Canada and continue R&D
for next generation clean hydrogen.
Nuclear Low Medium Medium High Medium
 Onshore: Innovate on domestic
 strength and leverage DFC/EXIM for
e
xports of incumbent and next gen-
 eration reactors. Friendshore uranium
fuels via Sapporo 5.
Geothermal High High High Lo
w High
 Leapfrog: Promote next-generation
 geothermal at home and in Europe,
Southeast Asia, and Africa, while ex-
 panding and diversifying supply chains.
 Pursue R&D for supercritical resources
 at home and with key players like
 Iceland or Italy.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
12 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
Clean Steel Medium High Medium High Medium
 Onshore: Promote electric arc furnace
 (EAF), hydrogen in direct reduced
 iron (H2-DRI) production, and novel
 low-carbon processes with the aim
 to export into the European Union’s
 and United Kingdom’s carbon border
 adjustment mechanism (CBAM).
Aluminum Low Medium Low High Medium
 Onshore and Friendshore Upstream:
Continue onshoring aluminum smelt-
 ers while deploying public finance to
 scale bauxite extraction in Australia,
Canada, and Brazil.
 Clean 
Ammonia High High High Medium High
 Onshore: Indigenize clean ammonia
 production and promote exports for
 fertilizer and as fuel via USTDA and
 ITA, with a focus on Japan, South
 Korea, and the EU.
 Carbon
 Capture,
 Utilization,
 and Storage
(CCUS)
Medium High Low Low High
 Maintain: Leverage U.S. industry
 expertise and export to key markets in
 Europe, Australia, Japan, South Korea,
 and the Gulf states—some emerging
 and developing markets like Indonesia
and Chile.
 Direct Air
 Capture
(DAC)
High High Low Low High
Maintain: Finalize long-term demon-
 strations, ensure viability of domestic
pipeline, and consider long-term ex-
 port markets (such as Kenya, Canada,
 and the Gulf states).
 Sustainable
 Aviation
Fuels
High High Medium Low Medium
 Leapfrog: Focus domestic production
 to third generation fuels and pair
 foreign development to co-locate with
 CCUS and DAC hubs abroad.
Ships Low Medium Low High Medium
Onshore: Work with Japanese and 
South Korean conglomerates to re-in-
dustrialize the U.S. maritime manufac-
turing base and ensure that U.S. ships 
are ammonia and methanol ready.
Note: For analysis on specific minerals, please see the taskforce’s “Assessing Progress in Building Clean Energy Supply Chains: 
The Technical Paper of the U.S. Foreign Policy for Clean Energy Taskforce.” 
Domestic industrial base is quantified by U.S. current and pipeline production capacity divided by expected U.S. demand in 2035. For 
geothermal and nuclear, present capacity was measured as a five-year average of production based on annual capacity additions. (Please 
see the Annex for exact metrics.) Supply chain resilience is based on internal analysis of Chinese and Russian shares of manufacturing 
capacities of these technology verticals and critical upstream inputs. (Please see the Annex for exact numbers on supply chain vulnerabil -
ities). Innovation potential is based on Milo McBride’s working paper “Catching Up or Leaping Ahead? How Energy Innovation Can Secure 
U.S. Industrial Stature in a Net-Zero World” from the Carnegie Endowment for Internation Peace, September 19, 2024. “Low” means that 
there are no observed next-generation technologies in that vertical, “medium” means that there are next-generation systems with varying 
likelihood to supplant the incumbent (rated both “low” and “medium” in the Catalytic Impact on Resilience metric), and “high” means that 
the next-generation technology could fully supplant the incumbent and its supply chains. Global gap to net-zero is the sector’s production 
gap to net-zero manufacturing capacity benchmarks based on the global production gap divided by the global current capacity. (Please see 
the Annex for exact metrics and the associated technical paper Allan et al. for further analysis.) 
 Domestic
 Industrial
Potential
 Supple Chain
Resilience
 Innovation
Opportunity
 National
Priority
 Global
 Net-Zero
Market Strategy

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 13
These parameters help identify optimal, sector-specific industrial and foreign policy 
strategies. Although solar photovoltaic (PV) is the fastest growing energy source globally 
and unilaterally dominated by China, it is not in the interest of the United States to onshore 
an entire supply chain that has little chance of competing with Chinese incumbents and 
no national security importance.57 Instead, the United States should focus on diversifying 
the global solar supply chain—specifically financing upstream components like polysilicon, 
ingots, and wafers—in third party countries such as India, South Korea, Vietnam, and 
the Gulf states. Simultaneously, the United States should focus on commercializing next 
generation, perovskite solar cells with partners in the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue 
(Quad) and South Korea. 
Batteries and magnetic motors are key to national and economic security given their 
importance to defense, automobile, and consumer electronic sectors. While both are 
developing a domestic industrial base, they come with severe supply chain risks because of 
Chinese graphite and rare earths.58 The United States should focus its battery strategy on the 
next generation of chemistries: silicon anode (which can be made without graphite), lithium 
metal (which does not require graphite), and lithium sulfur (which solely requires lithium).59 
As U.S. lithium metal and sulfur firms come to market, the country should promote its 
companies that can utilize existing lithium-ion factories, especially in Europe, to phase 
out the importance of Chinese dominated minerals and battery manufacturing. While the 
United States is developing magnet technologies that do not need rare earths, they are less 
advanced than next-generation batteries, implying that the United States should work with 
close security allies (such as the Five Eyes) to onshore a non-Chinese rare magnet supply 
chain while continuing to experiment with alternatives. 60 
Other technologies such as wind, heat pumps, and electrolyzers require less aggressive 
approaches that largely maintain course. The United States has a decent domestic industrial 
base and resilient supply chains for wind and heat pumps, but there is little present 
opportunity to innovate these systems and produce export markets. 61 Instead, the United 
States should maintain these industrial bases but design new incentives for them to act as 
demand drivers for domestic or allied-produced minerals, high-grade alloys, magnets, and 
ship building (in the case of offshore wind). For clean hydrogen production, the United 
States should consider friendshoring electrolyzer technology and its mineral supply chains 
while considering theoretical costs and technology limitations in pursuit of unlocking 
alternative hydrogen processes.
Clean firm power generation like nuclear and geothermal represent important new 
opportunities. The United States should continue to revitalize its domestic nuclear industrial 
base by producing incumbent and next generation reactors, while coordinating with allies 
in the Sapporo 5 pact to diversify away from Chinese and Russian uranium supply lines. 
Although recent industrial policy has unleashed enormous opportunities for nuclear 
energy, our analysis indicates that geothermal energy—which has a massively expanded 
resource potential thanks to the fracking revolution—represents a unique area of industrial 
strength, supply resilience, and market opportunity.62 Future policy should act accordingly

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
14 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
and focus all efforts on bringing next generation geothermal to market at home and in 
high-opportunity countries through de-risking measures for drilling and funding for 
demonstration. Although outside the scope of this analysis, advanced grid technologies 
including long-duration storage pose a similar and perhaps undervalued opportunity for export.
Industrial products like clean ammonia, steel, and aluminum should be onshored given 
their macroeconomic importance, present industrial base, and defense demand. Western 
production will struggle to compete with Chinese overcapacity without explicit efforts to 
create a non-Chinese market and build new technology pathways to disrupt traditional 
production methods. The United States should continue to bolster its low-carbon advantage 
in industrial products through federal government procurement, specifically emboldening 
new processes to make clean metals. 63 Similarly, the United States should maintain its edge 
in carbon capture and direct air capture technologies, ensuring that projects being developed 
at home are world-leading while, in the long term, promoting U.S. tech in key markets, 
particularly in Gulf countries. Sustainable aviation fuels could also represent an opportunity 
given U.S. expertise in refining and the scale of net-zero opportunity, but cost premiums are 
presently prohibitive, implying further R&D is necessary.64 
Ships are a unique challenge. The United States has lost its ability to manufacture civilian 
and military ships as China has increased control of the global shipbuilding market and 
various countries have worked to develop alternative, low-carbon fuels.65 The United States 
should seize this moment by collaborating with Japanese and South Korean conglomerates 
to onshore a shipbuilding industrial base to manufacture ships capable of running on 
low-carbon fuels. In doing so, it should simultaneously develop ammonia- and methanol-
ready refueling bunkers in line with clean shipping corridors to Asia and Europe. Both of 
these fuels present high opportunities for the United States given its dominance in energy 
production and refinement, existing bunkering infrastructure along the Gulf and Pacific 
coasts, and early prestige in startups developing alternative engines. 66 
Friendshoring critical minerals production (including for copper, nickel, lithium, graphite, 
and rare earths) will require an all-hands-on-deck approach, with the United States and its 
allies working together. This should include the continuation of onshoring efforts through 
faster access to financing and permitting, while pursuing multilateral and bilateral mineral 
partnerships with explicit financial backing via U.S. agencies. The United States should 
continue efforts to maintain high labor and environmental standards in foreign mining 
projects that include transparency and strong governance in its dealmaking. For more niche, 
illiquid, yet strategically relevant metals (such as rare earths), the federal government could 
continue to investigate opportunities in price insurance, like contracts for difference, to 
hedge against volatile fluctuations as well as civilian-use stockpiling to stimulate demand 
drivers akin to the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. All the while, the United States and its 
partners must accelerate R&D in mineral processing and advanced material production to 
build the whole supply chain from mines to critical components.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 15
Finally, the United States should continue to collaborate with its allies in mutually unlocking 
high reward technologies that can trigger step changes in energy and climate power 
dynamics. Supercritical geothermal, nuclear fusion, and geologic hydrogen all offer potential 
opportunities for clean energy abundance and play to America’s strengths of subsurface 
expertise and advanced fusion science. 67 While the United States has a strong early position, 
these supply chains, like others, will likely be global. The United States can and should work 
to lead sector specific coalitions for frontier technology alongside countries looking to de-risk 
from, and compete with, China.
 How to Achieve Success
The United States needs a focused, pragmatic, and coordinated foreign policy for clean energy 
supply chains. Under the past two administrations, the country began to enact foreign policy 
that advances its interests in energy technology and related minerals—but with shortcomings. 
Reflecting on these years, some political and financial capital was invested in low-return areas 
that were not crucial to developing U.S. energy technology, security, or dominance—let alone 
to reducing emissions. Going forward, U.S. policymakers, diplomats, and trade delegates can 
leverage their stature and tools to advance high-opportunity sectors by addressing supply chain 
vulnerabilities and identifying American technologies with export potential. 68 
Thus far, the United States has focused its diplomatic muscle primarily on several key clean 
technology verticals—minerals, hydrogen, and nuclear—across a diversity of aligned and 
non-aligned actors in the BRICS+ and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD). Alongside this fragmented bilateral strategy, some key minilateral 
efforts emerged, such as the Mineral Security Partnership (MSP) and coordination with 
members of the Sapporo 5 agreement on advanced nuclear reactors. Such partnerships 
are essential to building durable, multi-stakeholder buy-in and non-Chinese pipelines for 
technological build-out. But they represent piecemeal efforts sometimes informed by low-
hanging political fruit and routinely without the financial capital required. They have not yet 
resulted in a cohesive foreign industrial strategy.69 
The United States needs a robust international industrial policy for clean energy supply 
chains. This can be achieved by transforming the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and 
Investment (PGI) into a more focused and strategic effort. To deliver on its promise, the PGI 
needs a clear policy framework to enable the integration of a wide range of existing initiatives 
into more targeted domestic and international processes. 
The goal must be to use the PGI to bring together U.S. foreign tools, bilateral diplomatic 
initiatives, multilateral partnerships, and international financial institutions into a 
comprehensive global collaboration. Increased coordination both within the U.S. government 
and with its external partners is necessary to achieve the level of strategic action and 
investment scale to compete with China.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
16 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
We propose an overarching framework to focus the work of the PGI with five key elements:
1. Targets: Quantitative goals indexed to bottlenecks and geopolitically significant
nodes to focus the work of the United States and its partners70
2. Priority project pipeline: An organized interagency process for advancing priority
projects
3. Support for industrial policy: Technical assistance and bilateral support for
countries developing their own strategic approaches to building energy security
4. Finance: Mobilizing money from domestic sources—such as the DFC, the Export-
Import Bank (EXIM), U.S. Trade and Development Agency (USTDA), and the
Defense Production Act—and international sources (the World Bank, regional
development banks, and partner sovereign wealth funds, among others)
5. Market creation and market shaping: Create demand-pull for de-risked supply of
key technologies and materials by creating domestic and global markets
Figure 2. U.S. Clean Energy Outreach 
Bilateral Clean Energy Engagement in Select Countries since 2016
Source: Compiled documents from the White House Briefing Room, U.S. Department of Energy, U.S. Department of State, U.S. 
Department of the Treasury, Office of the United States Trade Representative, U.S. Trade and Development Agency, U.S. Agency 
for International D evelopment 
Note: Sample includes 40 of the world’s largest economies and relevant players in clean energy supply chains

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 17
Counterintuitively, the PGI needs to be simultaneously broadened and focused. It must 
be broadened by serving as an umbrella to bring together the foreign policy tools created 
during the first Trump administration and the Biden administration. It would serve as a 
coordinating body for the wide variety of foreign policy experiments initiated over the past 
eight years. It must be focused by being disciplined to meet supply chain targets. 
This new PGI needs a project pipeline that flows directly from the targets. It should assign 
each priority project to a country that will lead on project development and financing. For 
projects the United States leads, it should organize its foreign policy tools through Katie 
Auth’s proposal for Energy Security Compacts (ESCs).71 As Auth argues, the United States 
needs a mechanism to provide holistic support for energy project development abroad. ESCs 
would take the form of bilateral compacts between the United States and priority countries 
to create a pipeline of bankable projects. It would create a structured interagency process to 
assess priorities, developing coordinated investment plans across ten U.S. agencies, and deliver 
targeted support ranging from early-stage feasibility studies to large-scale project financing. 
The compacts would also provide a platform for technical assistance on industrial policy, 
which was pioneered by the Clean Energy Supply Chain Collaborative in the Biden White 
House.72 Further, they would increase the impact of the DFC, EXIM, and other agencies 
while strengthening U.S. influence through more effective investment. 
Figure 3. A Framework for Targeted Foreign Industrial Policy
Source: Author’s illustration

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
18 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
On the supply side, joint industrial policy means coordinating R&D and technical 
assistance. The United States and its partners do a lot of this right now, but in an 
opportunistic rather than systematic and targeted fashion. They currently do not do enough 
to create reciprocal or aligned subsidies. Reciprocal subsidies within clubs allow allies to 
compete with one another through markets while protecting their industries from Chinese 
non-market competition.
To fund priority projects coming through the pipeline, the United States and its partners 
will need to mobilize finance through domestic and international sources. This means 
strategically aligning the World Bank with clean energy priorities, but also organizing 
sovereign wealth funds and pension funds. Specific technology partnerships, such as 
the Sapporo 5 nuclear cooperation group or the Global Partnership for Climate Smart 
Infrastructure, would also be organized under the broadened PGI umbrella. 
Finally, creating secure demand is essential to protect markets outside of China from intense 
non-market competition. China can, for example, depress the prices of critical minerals or 
solar modules unless the United States and partners create secure markets. Tariffs are a piece 
of this, but, on their own, they will not create competitive industries. They risk raising costs 
and prompting drags on productivity. Joint procurement can also be used to bolster nascent 
industries and create the critical mass needed to secure ex-China supply.
To operationalize this plan, the PGI needs to be upgraded from an initiative housed within 
the State Department to a directorate of the national security advisor or an independent 
coordinating office within the White House. A critical problem, however, is that the 
National Security Council team or another coordinating office does not have direct access 
to the complex supply chain analysis and project evaluation teams that would be needed 
to make the PGI more strategic. Such teams are currently dispersed across the Department 
of Energy, the Department of State, the Department of Commerce, the DFC, and so on. 
Instead, a consolidated international industrial policy secretariat must be created within 
the National Security Council or an independent Energy Security Compacts Coordinators 
Office (as proposed by Auth and Moss).73 Dedicated expert capacities bringing together 
technological, financial, and supply chain knowledge must be built to inform and coordinate 
all the aspects of this framework.
In the absence of a strong, independent office, the PGI will continue to be driven by the 
schedules of the principals instead of the national interests of the United States. If the 
country is to regain geopolitical advantage, strategic investments need to be coordinated and 
executed in a more focused way and backed with larger and more flexible financial tools.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 19
 Conclusion
Four main recommendations flow from this analysis. 
1. Focus domestic industrial policy on leapfrog opportunities and use foreign 
policy to stimulate export markets and advance joint R&D. 74 
• Congress should demand a report on the state of U.S. industrial policy and 
competitiveness and use it to create bipartisan consensus around long-term 
technological and material priorities. 
• The report’s findings should inform key policies to accelerate early stage R&D 
through related tax policy and government funding, prepare the domestic 
labor force, incubate regional innovation hubs, and propose long-term 
demand-pull incentives to drive clean energy systems to market. 
• Foreign policy should be leveraged specifically for science diplomacy that 
targets coordinated R&D as well as trade and diplomatic efforts to stimulate 
early stage exports of novel U.S. technologies.
2. Broaden and focus the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment 
with clear supply chain targets, an improved domestic policy process, and an 
integrated set of foreign policy tools. 
• The United States and partners need to create a working list of targets 
to focus the work of the PGI. The targets should be sector specific and 
benchmarked to expected ex-China demand. 
• The executive branch through the National Security Council could work 
with the State Department to bring together existing programs and technical 
assistance efforts to advance clean energy supply chains under the PGI. The 
PGI should focus, as the Clean Energy Supply Chain Collaborative projects 
did, on building value-added processing and manufacturing overseas.
• The United States should use the PGI to create clubs for critical minerals, 
nuclear power, and steel and aluminum. These clubs should bring together 
supply-side coordination with market creation activities, such as harmonized 
tariffs. Such activities can be coordinated through the NSC-led interagency 
process, but new capacities will have to be built in the State Department to 
support project development and implementation.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
20 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
3. Create a domestic interagency process, such as the one proposed for Energy 
Security Compacts, to generate a project pipeline for building out overseas 
supply chains.75 
• The NSC and State Department must work together to integrate project 
pipelines into target-setting processes under the PGI to ensure that resources 
are focused on high priority technologies and minerals in key countries. 
• The ESC process enables the United States to correctly match tools to 
problems in the project pipeline, so that DFC, EXIM, and other international 
dollars are used for the right projects based on their commercialization level 
or scale.
• This could be done within the NSC or by creating an independent 
coordinating office.
4. Bolster the International Development Finance Corporation, the Export-
Import Bank, and other agencies to make them proper tools of strategic 
industrial policy overseas. 76
• The DFC and EXIM will both be up for reauthorization by Congress in 
the next two years, presenting opportunities to expand the scale of funding. 
These should coincide with a bolstered USTDA to expand the potential for 
early stage projects.
• DFC will be reauthorized in 2025. It could be altered to increase how much 
it can spend in sum and on a project basis, as well as making it applicable 
to higher income countries. Additional financial alterations could include 
scoring projects as equity investments for greater flexibility and providing 
political risk insurance. 
• EXIM’s reauthorization in 2026 could include raising the default rate cap, 
creating a technology neutral definition of renewable energy (including 
manufacturing and mineral processing), and developing a new National 
Interest Account to crowd-in capital with other development financial 
institutions or sovereign wealth funds.
The U.S. Foreign Policy for Clean Energy Taskforce has made more detailed 
recommendations on leapfrog technologies; how a broadened and focused PGI could help 
rebuild geopolitical advantage; how to improve the DFC and EXIM, which can be found in 
our U.S. foreign policy mapping paper; and how ESCs can improve grants and aid.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 21
Annex 1: For Table One Identifying Strategies for U.S. Clean Energy Success: Maintain, Onshore, 
Friendshore, or Leapfrog?
T echnology
 Domestic 
Industrial Potential
 Supply 
Chain Resilience Global Net-Zero Market
Solar modules 29.58% 81% 9%
Solar cells 23.19% 89% 12%
Solar wafers 94%
Onshore wind nacelles 13.23% 60% 177%
Onshore wind blades 55%
 Onshore wind towers 43%
Offshore wind nacelles 0% 76% 32%
Offshore wind blades 78%
Offshore wind towers 60%
Battery cells 52.18% 82% 373%
Battery cathode 73%
Battery anode 96%
Battery Electrolyte 86%
Sintered permanent magnet 31.82% 92% 215%
 Rare earth oxides 70%
Rare earth mining 68%
Electrolyzers 7.93% 68% 1,696%
PGM 41%
Heat pumps 33.41% 39% 238%
SAF 67. 24% 17% 3,500%
CCUS 43.58% 10% 6,632%
DAC 106.75% 0% 3,383,233%
Steel 15.47% 32% 422%
Iron ore 15%
Aluminum 4.8% 62% 315%
Alumina 61%
Bauxite 22%
Alternative fuel ships 0% 52% 1,054%
Low Emissions Ammonia 105.89% 0% 10,133%

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
22 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
Geothermal 98.15% 0% 784%
 Organic rankine cycle 0%
Nuclear reactors 0.84% 58% 343%
Nuclear fuels (U02) 23%
Nuclear enrichment (SWU) 59%
Nuclear processing (UF6) 44%
Uranium mining (U308) 9%
Domestic industrial base: Low = 0-10%, Medium = 10-50%, High = 50%+ 
Supply Chain Resilience: Low = 90%+, Medium = 50-90%, High = 0-50% 
Global Net-Zero Market: Low = 0-250%, Medium = 250-750%, High = 750%+ 
Note: Magnet figures are based on 2023 production, rather than total manufacturing capacities. Information about SAF, CCUS, and DAC 
supply chains is scarce due to industrial nascency. Therefore, Domestic Industrial Potential, Supply Chain Resilience, and Global Net-
Zero Market figures are benchmarked to total installed production/capture capacity. Domestic Industrial Potential and Global Net-Zero 
Market measures are included for end-stage products or processes. For information on available upstream component data, please see 
the associated technical publication “Assessing Progress in Building Clean Energy Supply Chains: The Technical Paper of the U.S. Foreign 
Policy for Clean Energy Taskforce.” 
Sources: Carnegie analysis of IEA IRENA, BNEF, World Nuclear Association, DNV, Global Energy Monitor, Mission Possible Partnership, 
and U.S. Department of Energy data. “Platinum Group Metals,” United States Geological Survey, January 2025, https:/ /pubs.usgs.gov/
periodicals/mcs2025/mcs2025-platinum-group.pdf; “Iron Ore,” United States Geological Survey, January 2024, https:/ /pubs.usgs.gov/
periodicals/mcs2024/mcs2024-iron-ore.pdf; “Bauxite and Alumina,” United States Geological Survey, January 2025, https:/ /pubs.usgs.
gov/periodicals/mcs2025/mcs2025-bauxite-Alumina.pdf.
T echnology
 Domestic 
Industrial Potential
 Supply 
Chain Resilience Global Net-Zero Market

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
23
 About the Authors
Bentley Allan is a nonresident scholar in the Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics 
Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He is associate professor of 
political science at Johns Hopkins University, director of the Net Zero Industrial Policy 
Lab, and a transition pathways principal at the Transition Accelerator. He is an expert in 
the political economy of decarbonization, clean energy supply chains, and global climate 
governance.
Milo McBride is a fellow in the Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics Program at the 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, DC. His research focuses 
on the geopolitics of energy transition technologies, critical minerals, and role of next-
generation advancements in decarbonization pathways. Alongside his work at Carnegie, 
Milo is a nonresident fellow at the Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University.
Noah J. Gordon is a fellow in the Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics Program at the 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, DC. His research focuses 
on climate change and how it’s changing international politics. He manages projects 
on climate geopolitics and security, global clean energy supply chains, and the interplay 
between climate change and migration; and he co-created a Carnegie podcast about animal 
agriculture and climate change, Barbecue Earth. 
Daniel Helmeci is a research assistant in the Carnegie Sustainability, Climate, and 
Geopolitics Program. He was previously a James C. Gaither Junior Fellow in the Carnegie 
Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics Program. Before joining Carnegie, Dan studied 
Political Science and History at Rice University.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
24 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
Jonas Goladman is a policy analyst with experience in public service, academia, and 
electoral politics in the United States and Canada.
Daevan Mangalmurti is a James C. Gaither Junior Fellow in the Sustainability, Climate 
and Geopolitics Program.
Debbra Goh is a James C. Gaither Junior Fellow in the Sustainability, Climate and 
Geopolitics Program.
Leonardo Martinez-Diaz is senior fellow and director of the Sustainability, Climate, 
and Geopolitics Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. His fields 
of expertise include climate politics and diplomacy, climate finance, and mitigating and 
managing the risks of climate change to economies and communities.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
25
 Notes
1 “World Energy Investment 2024,” International Energy Agency, June 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/
world-energy-investment-2024; Marlene Motyka, et al., “2025 Renewable Energy Industry Outlook,” 
Deloitte, December 9, 2024, https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/renewable-energy/
renewable-energy-industry-outlook.html; Malgorzata Wiatros-Motyka, Dave Jones, and Nicolas Fulghum, 
“Global Electricity Review 2024,” Ember, May 8, 2024, https://ember-energy.org/latest-insights/
global-electricity-review-2024/. 
2 Nelson Nsitem, “Global Energy Storage Market Records Biggest Jump Yet,” BloombergNEF , April 25, 2024, 
https://about.bnef.com/blog/global-energy-storage-market-records-biggest-jump-yet/.
3 Evelina Stoikou, “Lithium-Ion›s Grip on Storage Faces Wave of Novel T echnologies,” BloombergNEF , June 
4, 2024, https://about.bnef.com/blog/lithium-ions-grip-on-storage-faces-wave-of-novel-technologies/.
4 Kareem El-Sadi, et al., “Review of Drilling Performance in a Horizontal EGS Development,” Proceedings, 
49th Workshop on Geothermal Reservoir Engineering, February 14, 2024, https://pangea.stanford.edu/ERE/
db/GeoConf/papers/SGW/2024/Elsadi.pdf; “The Future of Geothermal Energy,” International Energy 
Agency, December 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/the-future-of-geothermal-energy.
5 Siobhan Rodriguez, “Nuclear Energy’s Renaissance Thanks to AI Needs,” Georgia T ech, October 4, 2024, 
https://news.gatech.edu/news/2024/10/04/nuclear-energys-renaissance-thanks-ai-needs.
6 Matthias Rehfeldt, et al., “Direct electrification of industrial process heat,” Agora Industry, June 5, 2024, 
https://www.agora-industry.org/publications/direct-electrification-of-industrial-process-heat; “Industrial 
Electrification: Strategies and Policies for Europe,” World Economic Forum, December 2024, https://
initiatives.weforum.org/clean-power-and-electrification/industrial-electrification. 
7 Abigail Registry, “The U.S. Is Getting Serious About Industrial Decarbonization,” Breakthrough Energy, 
April 1, 2024, https://www.breakthroughenergy.org/newsroom/articles/industrial-demonstrations-
program/; Maria Gallucci, “Biden admin invests $6B to cut carbon from steel, cement — and 
snacks,” Canary Media, March 25, 2024, https://www.canarymedia.com/articles/clean-industry/
biden-admin-invests-6b-to-cut-carbon-from-steel-cement-and-snacks. 
8 Jeremy Salvucci, “The least expensive car brands to repair and maintain according to 
Consumer Reports,” TheStreet, June 20, 2024, https://www.thestreet.com/automotive/
least-most-expensive-car-brands-to-repair-maintain-according-to-consumer-reports.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
26 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
9 Kingsmill Bond, et al., “X-Change: Cars,” Rocky Mountain Institute, 2023, https://rmi.org/insight/x-
change-cars/#:~:text=The%20end%20of%20the%20ICE%20age&text=In%20X%2DChange%3A%20
Cars%2C,(ICE)%20age%20has%20begun; Brian Kahn, “The World Hit ‘Peak› Gas-Powered Vehicle 
Sales — in 2017,” Bloomberg, January 30, 2024, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-01-30/
world-hit-peak-gas-powered-vehicles-as-evs-gain-market-share.
10 Colin McKerracher, et al., “Electric Vehicle Outlook 2024,” BloombergNEF , June 12, 2024, 
https://about.bnef.com/electric-vehicle-outlook/#download; “Charger Types and Speeds,” U.S. 
Department of T ransportation, https://www.transportation.gov/rural/ev/toolkit/ev-basics/charging-
speeds#:~:text=Direct%20current%20fast%20charging%20(DCFC)%20equipment%20offers%20
rapid%20charging%20along,not%20work%20with%20fast%20chargers. 
11 “Electric vehicle battery prices are expected to fall almost 50% by 2026,” Goldman Sachs, October 7, 2024, 
https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/articles/electric-vehicle-battery-prices-are-expected-to-fall-almost-
50-percent-by-2025?utm_source=chatgpt.com; 
12 “World Energy Investment 2024,” International Energy Agency, June 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/
world-energy-investment-2024.
13 Victoria Cuming, “Emerging Markets Energy Investment Outlook 2024,” Glasgow Financial Alliance for 
Net Zero, November 14, 2024, https://assets.bbhub.io/professional/sites/24/Emerging-Market-Investment-
Outlook-2024.pdf, pp. 15.
14 Faseeh Mangi, “Surprise Solar Boom in Pakistan Helps Millions, But Harms Grid,” Bloomberg, November 
21, 2024, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-11-22/surprise-solar-boom-in-pakistan-helps-
millions-but-harms-grid?sref=79i9aXlC; Noah Gordon and Daevan Mangalmurti, “A surprise solar boom 
reveals a fatal flaw in our climate change projections,” Vox, December 1, 2024, https://www.vox.com/
future-perfect/388506/solar-energy-power-projections-climate-change-pakistan.
15 Euan Graham and Nicolas Fulghum, “Solar power continues to surge in 2024,” Ember, September 19, 2024, 
https://ember-energy.org/latest-insights/solar-power-continues-to-surge-in-2024/; “Türkiye sets net zero 
emissions target with new climate law proposal,” Daily Sabah, January 22, 2025, https://www.dailysabah.
com/turkiye/turkiye-sets-net-zero-emissions-target-with-new-climate-law-proposal/news/amp.
16 Vikram Singh and Kingsmill Bond, “Powering Up the Global South,” Rocky Mountain Institute, October 
2024, https://rmi.org/insight/powering-up-the-global-south/.
17 “Unleashing American Energy,” The White House, January 20, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
presidential-actions/2025/01/unleashing-american-energy/.
18 David Doherty, “Oil Faces a Demand Issue. Biggest User Segment to Peak in 2027,” BloombergNEF , 
September 4, 2024, https://about.bnef.com/blog/oil-faces-a-demand-issue-biggest-user-segment-
to-peak-in-2028/; Simon Flowers and Ann-Louise Hittle, “A window opens for OPEC+ oil,” Wood 
Mackenzie, June 20, 2024, https://www.woodmac.com/blogs/the-edge/window-opens-for-opec-oil/; 
“World Energy Outlook 2024,” International Energy Agency, October 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/
world-energy-outlook-2024.
19 Jacky Wong, “China›s EV Boom is Starting to Pinch Oil Producers,” Wall Street Journal, December 23, 2024, 
https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/chinas-ev-boom-is-starting-to-pinch-oil-producers-649eee50.
20 “China›s EV exports seen stalling in 2025,” Reuters, January 9, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/business/
autos-transportation/chinas-car-sales-extend-gains-dec-2025-01-09/#:~:text=NEV%20sales%20rose%20
40.7%25%20to,fuel%20type%20cars%20in%20China; Colin McKerracher, “China›s Clean-T ruck Surprise 
Defies the EV Slowdown Narrative,” BloombergNEF , March 12, 2024, https://about.bnef.com/blog/
chinas-clean-truck-surprise-defies-the-ev-slowdown-narrative/; Jacky Wong, “China’s EV Boom is Starting 
to Pinch Oil Producers,” Wall Street Journal, December 23, 2024, https://www.wsj.com/business/energy-oil/
chinas-ev-boom-is-starting-to-pinch-oil-producers-649eee50. 
21 Vinicius Nunes and Giulia Lopes, “Did You Spot a New EV in Brazil? It’s Probably Chinese,” 
BloombergNEF , November 19, 2024, https://about.bnef.com/blog/did-you-spot-a-new-ev-in-brazil-its-
probably-chinese/#:~:text=Chinese%20automakers%20accounted%20for%2089,off%20conveyor%20
belts%20in%20Brazil.; Ella Nilsen and Nimi Princewill, “EVs are starting to overtake gas-powered 
cars in a surprising place,” CNN, August 19, 2024, https://www.cnn.com/2024/08/17/climate/

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 27
ethiopia-evs-gas-car-ban-climate/index.html#:~:text=Despite%20the%20cost%2C%20Ethiopia›s%20
vehicle,its%20vehicles%2C%20according%20to%20CleanT echnica. 
22 Sekarsari Sugihartono, “China›s New Policy on Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF): A Step T owards Greener 
Future,” Modern Diplomacy, August 22, 2024, https://moderndiplomacy.eu/2024/08/22/chinas-new-
policy-on-sustainable-aviation-fuel-saf-a-step-towards-greener-future/; Mai Hu and Yue Dong, “China›s 
shipping emissions governance: status and prospects under the dual carbon goal,” Frontiers in Marine 
Science 11, September 10, 2024, https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/marine-science/articles/10.3389/
fmars.2024.1405312/full.
23 Seb Kennedy, “Sizing up the LNG glut (part 1),” Energy Flux, January 2027, 2025, https://www.
energyflux.news/p/sizing-up-the-lng-glut-part-1?utm_campaign=email-half-post&r=83ojp&utm_
source=substack&utm_medium=email; Tsvetana Paraskova, “Wave of New LNG Supply Fuels Glut Fears,” 
Oilprice.com, January 9, 2025, https://oilprice.com/Energy/Natural-Gas/Wave-of-New-LNG-Supply-Fuels-
Glut-Fears.html.
24 Libby Copsey, “China›s Solar PV Exports,” Ember, January 2025, https://ember-energy.org/data/
china-solar-exports-data/.
25 “Energy T ransition Investment T rends 2025,” BloombergNEF , January 30, 2025, https://about.bnef.com/
energy-transition-investment/.
26 “The State of Clean Energy T echnology Manufacturing,” International Energy Agency, May 
2023, https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/0a421001-6157-436d-893c-c37eeab54967/
TheStateofCleanT echnologyManufacturing.pdf.
27 Adli Azayaka Huda et al., “Indonesia Electric Vehicle Boom; A temporary trend of a long-term vision,” 
International Institute for Sustainable Development, February 7, 2025, https://www.iisd.org/articles/
deep-dive/indonesian-electric-vehicle-boom-temporary-trend-or-long-term-vision; Matthieu Salomon, et 
al., “Indonesia’s Energy T ransition Ambitions: Nickel Downstreaming and Beyond,” Natural Resources 
Governance Initiative, January 30, 2025, https://resourcegovernance.org/articles/indonesia-energy-
transition-ambitions-nickel-downstreaming-and-beyond; Benjamin T orres Barron et al., “Mexico: ‘Plan 
Mexico’ tax incentives and other measures to attract investments confirmed,” Baker McKenzie, January 
28, 2025, https://insightplus.bakermckenzie.com/bm/tax/mexico-tax-incentives-and-proposals-to-attract-
investments-and-foster-innovation-as-part-of-plan-mexico-are-confirmed; “Brazil T ransition Factbook,” 
BNEF , September 2024, https://assets.bbhub.io/professional/sites/24/Brazil-T ransition-Factbook.pdf; Shayak 
Sengupta, et al., “India’s Role in Diversifying Global Clean Energy Supply Chains,” ORF America, June 24, 
2024, https://orfamerica.org/newresearch/india-global-clean-energy-supply-chains.
28 Renewable Energy,” International T rade Administration, January 12, 2024, https://www.trade.gov/
country-commercial-guides/india-renewable-energy.
29 Hannah Jeong and Bentley Allan, “Morocco›s position in the energy transition,” A rising energy and EV 
supply chain power,” Net Zero Industrial Policy Lab, September 2023, https://www.netzeropolicylab.com/s/
GP01-Morocco-vf.pdf; “EIB Global supports Vietnam’s Just Energy T ransition,” European Investment 
Bank, October 25, 2023, https://www.eib.org/en/press/news/eib-global-supports-vietnams-just-energy-
transition; “Vietnam is a T op Destination for European Companies to expand their business,” Source of 
Asia, April 19, 2023, https://www.sourceofasia.com/vietnam-is-a-top-destination-for-european-companies-
to-expand-business/; Rob Schmitz, “A lithium mine in Serbia could rev up Europe’s e-vehicles, but 
opposition is fierce,” NPR, August 23, 2024, https://www.npr.org/2024/08/23/nx-s1-5081517/rio-tinto-
lithium-serbia-europe-ev-vehicles-battery-supply-chain; Patrick Jowett, “China’s Hunan Rich plans 1 GW 
solar panel factory in Serbia,” PV Magazine, May 10, 2024, https://www.pv-magazine.com/2024/05/10/
chinas-hunan-rich-plans-1-gw-solar-panel-factory-in-serbia/. 
30 Nasser Saidi, “Economic Diversification is the GCC’s T op Priority,” Middle East Council on Global Affairs, 
May 9, 2024, https://mecouncil.org/blog_posts/economic-diversification-is-the-gccs-top-priority/.
31 “President of Indonesia Inaugurates Southeast Asia’s Largest Floating Solar Plant,” Masdar, November 9, 
2023, https://masdar.ae/en/news/newsroom/president-of-indonesia-inaugurates-floating-solar-plant; Saeed 
Shah and Summer Said, “Gulf Nations Poised to Invest Billions in Pakistan as It Seeks Infusion of Foreign 
Currency,” Wall Street Journal, August 10, 2023, https://www.wsj.com/articles/gulf-nations-poised-to-invest-
billions-in-pakistan-as-it-seeks-infusion-of-foreign-currency-9dfbb2ad; Jonathan T ouriño Jacobo, “Saudi

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
28 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
Arabia signs deals for 30GW domestic solar PV manufacturing,” PV T ech, July 17, 2024, https://www.
pv-tech.org/saudi-arabia-signs-deals-for-30gw-domestic-solar-pv-manufacturing/. 
32 “UAE’s Masdar announces $6 bln project to deliver reliable clean power,” 
Reuters, January 14, 2025, https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/
uaes-masdar-launches-facility-produce-1gw-uninterrupted-renewable-energy-2025-01-14/. 
33 “Only a quarter of Saudi Arabia’s $1 trillion Capex plan will go to oil,” Goldman 
Sachs, August 14, 2024, https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/articles/
only-a-quarter-of-saudi-arabias-1-trillion-capex-plan-will-go-into-oil.
34 Harry Dempsey and Chloe Cornish, “How Gulf states are putting their money into mining,” Financial 
Times, April 1, 2024, https://www.ft.com/content/59298650-540a-43cd-86f8-a6c6db0aa906.
35 Erik Kreil, “United States produces more crude oil than any country, ever,” Energy 
Information Administration, March 11, 2024, https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/
detail.php?id=61545; “T otal energy production from natural gas 2023,” Energy 
Information Administration, 2024, https://www.eia.gov/international/rankings/country/
USA?pid=4413&aid=1&f=A&y=01%2F01%2F2023&u=0&v=none&pa=287. 
36 Tng Yong Li, “Cop: US democrats flag looming Chinese climate lead,” Argus Media, November 16, 2024, 
https://www.argusmedia.com/en/news-and-insights/latest-market-news/2629636-cop-us-democrats-flag-
looming-chinese-climate-lead; “The World China Made,” Office of Senator Marco Rubio, September 2024, 
https://www.rubio.senate.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/09/The-World-China-Made.pdf
37 Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics, Cambridge University Press; Daniel Drezner, “State structure, 
technological leadership and the maintenance of hegemony,” Review of International Studies 27, no. 1 (2001): pp. 
3-25. 
38 Please see the associated U.S. Foreign Policy for Clean Energy Taskforce report, “Assessing Progress in 
Building Clean Energy Supply Chains: The T echnical Paper of the U.S. Foreign Policy for Clean Energy 
Taskforce.””
39 Ilaria Mazzocco, “Rethinking Competition with China on Clean T echnologies,” CSIS, October 29, 2024, 
https://www.csis.org/analysis/rethinking-competition-china-clean-technologies.
40 Ian Clay and Robert D. Atkinson, “Wake Up, America: China Is Overtaking the United States in Innovation 
Capacity,” Information T echnology and Innovation Foundation, January 23, 2023, https://itif.org/
publications/2023/01/23/wake-up-america-china-is-overtaking-the-united-states-in-innovation-capacity/.
41 Yici Wang, “Clean energy tech is struggling. Can catalytic capital save the day?,” 
Chicago Policy Review, June 19, 2024, https://chicagopolicyreview.org/2024/06/19/
clean-energy-tech-is-struggling-can-catalytic-capital-save-the-day/.
42 “International Infrastructure Projects: China’s Investments Significantly Outpace the U.S., and Experts 
Suggest Potential Improvements to the U.S. Approach,” U.S. Government Accountability Office, September 
2024, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-24-106866.pdf.
43 Kyle Chan, “China›s overlapping tech-industrial ecosystems,” High Capacity, January 22, 2025, https://
www.high-capacity.com/p/chinas-overlapping-tech-industrial.
44 “2023-2030 DOD Lithium Battery Strategy,” U.S. Department of Defense, December 2022, https://www.
businessdefense.gov/ibr/pat/battery-strategy.html.
45 “Securing Defense-Critical Supply Chains,” U.S. Department of Defense, February 2022, https://media.defense.
gov/2022/Feb/24/2002944158/-1/-1/1/DOD-EO-14017-REPORT-SECURING-DEFENSE-CRITICAL-
SUPPLY-CHAINS.PDF; Halimah Najieb-Locke, Lee Robinson, and Devon Bistarkey, “Collaboration and 
Standardization Are Key to DOD›s Battery Strategy, Meeting U.S. Energy Objectives,” U.S. Department of 
Defense, June 5, 2023, https://www.defense.gov/News/News-Stories/Article/Article/3417484/collaboration-and-
standardization-are-key-to-dods-battery-strategy-meeting-us-e/; “Magnetic Applications in the Military Field,” 
Stanford Magnets, April 9, 2024, https://www.stanfordmagnets.com/magnetic-applications-in-the-military-field.
html.
46 “Secretary Wright Acts to ‘Unleash Golden Era of American Energy Dominance,’” 
U.S. Department of Energy, February 5, 2025, https://www.energy.gov/articles/

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 29
secretary-wright-acts-unleash-golden-era-american-energy-dominance; Kelsey 
Tamborrino, “Wright offers energy ‘abundance’ vision in first remarks to DOE staff,” 
Politico Pro, February 5, 2025, https://subscriber.politicopro.com/article/2025/02/
chris-wright-offers-energy-abundance-vision-in-first-remarks-to-doe-staff-00202613. 
47 Robert Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living Since the Civil War, 
Princeton University Press, 2017.
48 John D. Wilson, Zach Zimmerman, and Rob Gramlich, “Strategic Industries Surging: Driving US Power 
Demand,” Grid Strategies, December 2024, https://gridstrategiesllc.com/wp-content/uploads/National-
Load-Growth-Report-2024.pdf.
49 Noah Gordon, et al., «Focusing Industrial Strategy: Which Clean Energy Supply Chains Should Have 
Priority?,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, December 12, 2024, https://carnegieendowment.
org/research/2024/12/focusing-industrial-strategy-which-clean-energy-supply-chains-should-have-priority.
50 “U.S. International Development Finance Corporation Begins Operations,” U.S. Development 
Finance Corporation, January 2, 2020, https://www.dfc.gov/media/press-releases/us-international-
development-finance-corporation-begins-operations; Chad Bown, Euijin Jung, and Zhiyao Lu, 
”T rump, China, and Tariffs: From Soybeans to Semiconductors,” Peterson Institute for International 
Economics, June 18, 2018, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-and-investment-policy-watch/
trump-china-and-tariffs-soybeans-semiconductors; “President T rump Approves Relief for U.S. 
Washing Machine and Solar Cell Manufacturers,” Office of the United States T rade Representative, 
January 22, 2018, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2018/
january/president-trump-approves-relief-us; “Executive Order on Addressing the Threat to the 
Domestic Supply Chain from Reliance on Critical Minerals from Foreign Adversaries,” White 
House, September 30, 2020, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/
executive-order-addressing-threat-domestic-supply-chain-reliance-critical-minerals-foreign-adversaries/.
51 “Unleashing American Energy,” The White House, January 20, 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
presidential-actions/2025/01/unleashing-american-energy/. 
52 Bentley Allan, Noah Gordon, and Cathy Wang, «Friendshoring Critical Minerals: 
What Could the U.S. and Its Partners Produce?,” Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, May 3, 2023, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2023/05/
friendshoring-critical-minerals-what-could-the-us-and-its-partners-produce?lang=en.
53 Jay T urner, et al., “The Green Machine,“ Wellesley University, Accessed February 13, 2025, https://www.
the-big-green-machine.com/. 
54 Noah Gordon, et al., «Focusing Industrial Strategy: Which Clean Energy Supply Chains Should Have 
Priority?,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, December 12, 2024, https://carnegieendowment.
org/research/2024/12/focusing-industrial-strategy-which-clean-energy-supply-chains-should-have-priority.
55 Milo McBride, “Catching Up or Leaping Ahead? How Energy Innovation Can Secure U.S. Industrial 
Stature in a Net-Zero World,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 19, 2024, https://
carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/09/energy-innovation-us-industrial-stature?lang=en.
56 Heather Zichal and Ramaswamy Variankaval, “How to close the ‘missing middle,’” Cipher, July 17, 2024, 
https://www.ciphernews.com/articles/how-to-close-the-missing-middle/. 
57 Euan Graham and Nicolas Fulghum, “Solar Power Continues to Surge in 2024,” Ember, September 19, 
2024, https://ember-energy.org/latest-insights/solar-power-continues-to-surge-in-2024/; “Solar PV ,” 
International Energy Agency, 2025, https://www.iea.org/energy-system/renewables/solar-pv; “Energy 
T echnology Perspectives 2024,” International Energy Agency, November 2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/
energy-technology-perspectives-2024. 
58 Amy Bennett, “China exposes EU and US vulnerabilities in graphite,” Fastmarkets, October 26, 2023, 
https://www.fastmarkets.com/insights/china-exposes-eu-and-us-vulnerabilities-in-graphite/; Mary Hui, 
“Even the US’s planned rare earth magnet factory can’t shake the influence of China,” Quartz, September 22, 
2023, https://qz.com/us-rare-earth-magnet-factory-china-exposure-risk-1850863842. 
59 Milo McBride, “Catching Up or Leaping Ahead? How Energy Innovation Can Secure U.S. Industrial 
Stature in a Net-Zero World,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 19, 2024, https://
carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/09/energy-innovation-us-industrial-stature?lang=en.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
30 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
60 Casey Crownhart, “How new magnets could accelerate climate action,” MIT T echnology Review, January 
31, 2024, https://www.technologyreview.com/2024/01/31/1087413/magnets-climate-action/. 
61 “Energy T echnology Perspectives 2024,” International Energy Agency, November 2024, https://www.iea.org/
reports/energy-technology-perspectives-2024; “Renewables 2024,” International Energy Agency, October 
2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/renewables-2024.
62 “The pathway to: Next-Generation Geothermal Power Commercial Liftoff,” U.S. Department of Energy, 
October 2024, https://liftoff.energy.gov/next-generation-geothermal-power/.
63 Milo McBride, “Catching Up or Leaping Ahead? How Energy Innovation Can Secure U.S. Industrial 
Stature in a Net-Zero World,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 19, 2024, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/09/energy-innovation-us-industrial-stature?lang=en.
64 Valeriya Azarova, Hartej Singh, Aamir Shams, “Unraveling Willingness to Pay for 
Sustainable Aviation Fuel,” Rocky Mountain Institute, September 17, 2024, https://rmi.org/
unraveling-willingness-to-pay-for-sustainable-aviation-fuel/. 
65 Matthew Funaiole, “The Threat of China’s Shipbuilding Empire,” CSIS, May 10, 2024, https://
www.csis.org/analysis/threat-chinas-shipbuilding-empire; Julia Atchison, “Government Support for 
Ammonia-Powered Shipping in Japan, Korea,” Ammonia Energy Association, January 28, 2025, https://
ammoniaenergy.org/articles/government-support-for-ammonia-powered-shipping-in-japan-korea/.
66 “Oceans of Opportunity: Supplying Green Methanol and Ammonia at Ports,” Mission Innovation, April 
2024, https://explore.mission-innovation.net/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/Oceans-of-Opportunity-
Spreads_compressed.pdf; «Energy T echnology Perspectives 2024,” International Energy Agency, November 
2024, https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-technology-perspectives-2024; «Maritime Industry Leaders to 
Explore Ammonia as Marine Fuel in the U.S. West Coast,” Sumitomo Corporation, March 29, 2024, 
https://www.sumitomocorp.com/en/us/news/release/2024/local/20240329; “Amogy Joins Forces with 
the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore and Partners to Establish Future Fuels T raining Hub 
for Maritime Workforce,” Amogy, April 15, 2024, https://amogy.co/news/amogy-joins-forces-with-
the-maritime-and-port-authority-of-singapore-and-partners-to-establish-future-fuels-training-hub-for-
maritime-workforce; Allison Prang, “Amogy Raises $56M to Commercialize Ammonia for Heavy-Duty 
T ransit,” Canary Media, January 15, 2025, https://www.canarymedia.com/articles/sea-transport/
amogy-raises-53m-to-commercialize-ammonia-for-heavy-duty-transit.
67 Jeff T ollefson, “US nuclear-fusion lab enters new era: achieving ‘ignition’ over and over,” Nature, December 
15, 2023, https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-04045-8; Aaron Larson, “U.S. in a Race with China 
to Develop Commercial Fusion Power T echnology,” POWER, September 20, 2024, https://www.powermag.
com/u-s-in-a-race-with-china-to-develop-commercial-fusion-power-technology/; “The Pathway to: Next-
Generation Geothermal Power Commercial Liftoff,” U.S. Department of Energy, accessed February 2025, 
https://liftoff.energy.gov/next-generation-geothermal-power/. 
68 This passage is based on text from another paper in this series, Milo McBride and Daniel Helmeci, 
“Minerals, Manufacturing, and Markets: Foreign Policy for U.S. Energy T echnology and Minerals.”
69 Ibid.
70 The technical work of the taskforce provides a basis for this targeting exercise by laying out ex-China 
pathway goals. 
71 Katie Auth, “Our Shared Energy Security: Why the U.S. and Its Energy-Poor Allies 
Must Coinvest in Solutions—and How,” Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, January 13, 2025, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2025/01/
our-shared-energy-security-why-the-us-and-its-energy-poor-allies-must-coinvest-in-solutions?lang=en.
72 “FACT SHEET: Biden- Harris Administration Leverages Historic U.S. Climate Leadership at Home and 
Abroad to Urge Countries to Accelerate Global Climate Action at U.N. Climate Conference (COP28),” 
The White House, December 2, 2023, https://bidenwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2023/12/02/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-leverages-historic-u-s-climate-leadership-at-
home-and-abroad-to-urge-countries-to-accelerate-global-climate-action-at-u-n-climate-conference-cop28/.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Allan, McBride, Gordon, Helmeci, Goldman, Mangalmurti, Goh, and Martinez-Diaz | 31
73 T odd Moss and Katie Auth, “U.S. Energy Security Compacts: A Bipartisan Blueprint to Reinvigorate U.S. 
Influence Through Energy Investment,” Energy for Growth Hub, April 2, 2024, https://energyforgrowth.
org/article/u-s-energy-security-compacts/, pp. 6.
74 Milo McBride, “Catching Up or Leaping Ahead? How Energy Innovation Can Secure U.S. Industrial 
Stature in a Net-Zero World,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 19, 2024, https://
carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/09/energy-innovation-us-industrial-stature?lang=en. 
75 Katie Auth, “Our Shared Energy Security: Why the U.S. and Its Energy-Poor Allies Must Coinvest 
in Solutions—and How,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, January 13, 2025, https://
carnegieendowment.org/research/2025/01/our-shared-energy-security-why-the-us-and-its-energy-poor-
allies-must-coinvest-in-solutions?lang=en; T odd Moss and Katie Auth, “U.S. Energy Security Compacts: A 
Bipartisan Blueprint to Reinvigorate U.S. Influence Through Energy Investment,” Energy for Growth Hub, 
April 2, 2024, https://energyforgrowth.org/article/u-s-energy-security-compacts/.
76 Erin Collinson, Clemence Landers, and Justin Hurley “Race to Reauthorization: What a New House Bill 
Would Mean for DFC,” Center for Global Development, July 24, 2024, https://www.cgdev.org/blog/
race-reauthorization-what-new-house-bill-would-mean-dfc; Daniel F . Runde, “Reauthorization of the U.S. 
Development Finance Corporation Provides an Important Opportunity,” CSIS, June 30, 2023, https://www.
csis.org/analysis/reauthorization-us-development-finance-corporation-provides-important-opportunity.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
32 | How the U.S. Can Stop Losing the Race for Clean Energy
 Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace
In a complex, changing, and increasingly contested world, the Carnegie Endowment gen-
erates strategic ideas, supports diplomacy, and trains the next generation of international 
scholar-practitioners to help countries and institutions take on the most difficult global 
problems and advance peace. With a global network of more than 170 scholars across twenty 
countries, Carnegie is renowned for its independent analysis of major global problems and 
understanding of regional contexts.
Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics Program
The Sustainability, Climate, and Geopolitics Program explores how climate change and the 
responses to it are changing international politics, global governance, and world security. 
Our work covers topics from the geopolitical implications of decarbonization and environ-
mental breakdown to the challenge of building out clean energy supply chains, alternative 
protein options, and other challenges of a warming planet.

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
CarnegieEndowment.org
