
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
U.S.-CHINA 
TECHNOLOGICAL 
“DECOUPLING” 
A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK
JON BATEMAN
With Foreword by Eric Schmidt

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
© 2022 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. All rights reserved.
Carnegie does not take institutional positions on public policy issues; the views represented 
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of Carnegie, its staff, 
or its trustees.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means 
without permission in writing from the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Please 
direct inquiries to:
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
Publications Department
1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
P: + 1 202 483 7600
F: + 1 202 483 1840
CarnegieEndowment.org
This publication can be downloaded at no cost at CarnegieEndowment.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
TABLE OF CONTENTS
About the Author v
Abbreviations vii
Foreword ix
Executive Summary 1
The Evolution of U.S. Thinking and Policy 9
Choosing a Strategy 35
Translating Strategy Into Policy and Process 53
Maintaining a Military Edge Over China 57
Limiting Chinese National Security Espionage 65
Preventing Chinese Sabotage in a Crisis 73

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Limiting Chinese Influence Operations 81
Denying Support for Chinese and China-Enabled 
Authoritarianism and Repression 87
Countering Unfair Chinese Economic Practices and 
Intellectual Property Theft 97
Competing and Leading in Strategic Industries 105
Obtaining General Leverage Over China 113
Shaping U.S. Domestic Narratives 117
Conclusion 121
Notes 123
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 163

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
v 
Jon Bateman is a fellow in the T echnology and International Affairs Program at the 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. He previously worked as a senior intelligence 
analyst, policy adviser, and speechwriter in the U.S. Department of Defense, most recently 
serving as special assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author is deeply grateful to George Perkovich for his patient guidance and penetrat -
ing reviews of this report throughout its development. Special thanks also go to Marjory 
Blumenthal, T om Carothers, Mark Chandler, Chris Chivvis, Tino Cuéllar, Doug Farrar, 
Steve Feldstein, Sarah Gordon, Yukon Huang, Jim Miller, Mike Nelson, Matt Sheehan, 
Stephen Wertheim, and T ong Zhao for their valuable written feedback on drafts. 
Conversations with many others—in government, the private sector, academia, and civil 
society—helped to test and sharpen the report’s underlying ideas. Thanks are also owed to 
Evan Burke, Emeizmi Mandagi, Nikhil Manglik, and Arthur Nelson for research assistance, 
and to Isabella Furth, Natalie Brase, Jocelyn Soly, and Amy Mellon for editing and design. 
This report is the author’s sole responsibility and does not represent the views of any other 
person or institution.
The research for and writing of this report were supported by the William and Flora 
Hewlett Foundation. Editorial production and dissemination were supported by a grant 
from Schmidt Futures.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
vii 
ABBREVIATIONS
AI Artificial intelligence
CBP Customs and Border Protection
CCL Commerce Control List
CFIUS Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
DHS Department of Homeland Security
DOD Department of Defense
EAR Export Administration Regulations
ECRA Export Control Reform Act
FCC Federal Communications Commission
FIRRMA Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act
IC Intelligence Community
ICTS Information and communications technology or services
IEEPA International Emergency Economic Powers Act

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
viii U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
INA Immigration and Nationality Act
ITAR International T raffic in Arms Regulations
MEU Military End User
NSC National Security Council
PLA People’s Liberation Army
PRC People’s Republic of China
R&D Research and development
SDN Specially Designated Nationals
SEC Securities and Exchange Commission
STEM Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
USITC U.S. International T rade Commission
USML U.S. Munitions List
USTR U.S. T rade Representative
WTO World T rade Organization

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
ix 
FOREWORD
T echnology is the engine that powers superpowers. As the chair of the National Security 
Commission on Artificial Intelligence (NSCAI), I led the effort that ultimately delivered a 
harsh message to the U.S. Congress and to the administration: America is not prepared to 
defend or compete in the AI era. The fact is that America has been technologically domi -
nant for so long that some U.S. leaders came to take it for granted. They were wrong. A 
second technological superpower, China, has emerged. It happened with such astonishing 
speed that we’re all still straining to understand the implications.
Washington has awakened to find the United States deeply technologically enmeshed with 
its chief long-term rival. America built those technology ties over many years and for lots 
of good reasons. China’s tech sector continues to benefit American businesses, universities, 
and citizens in myriad ways—providing critical skilled labor and revenue to sustain U.S. 
R&D, for example. But that same Chinese tech sector also powers Beijing’s military build-
up, unfair trade practices, and repressive social control.
What should we do about this? In Washington, many people I talk to give a similar answer. 
They say that some degree of technological separation from China is necessary, but we 
shouldn’t go so far as to harm U.S. interests in the process. That’s exactly right, of course, 
but it’s also pretty vague. How partial should this partial separation be—would 15 percent 
of U.S.-China technological ties be severed, or 85 percent? Which technologies would fall 
on either side of the cut line? And what, really, is the strategy for America’s long-term tech-
nology relationship with China? The further I probe, the less clarity and consensus I find.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
x U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
In fairness, these are serious dilemmas. They’re also unfamiliar. “Decoupling” entered the 
Washington lexicon just a few years ago, and it represents a dramatic break from earlier 
assumptions. In 2018, for example, I remarked that the global internet would probably 
bifurcate into a Chinese-led internet and a U.S.-led internet. Back then, this idea was still 
novel enough that the comment made headlines around the world. Now, the prediction has 
already come halfway true. Meanwhile, policymakers—who usually aren’t technologists—
have scrambled to educate themselves about the intricate global supply chains that still link 
the United States, China, and many other countries.
In 2019, I was appointed to be the chair of the NSCAI, a congressionally mandated bipar-
tisan commission that was charged with “consider[ing] the methods and means necessary 
to advance the development of artificial intelligence, machine learning, and associated tech-
nologies to comprehensively address the national security and defense needs of the United 
States.”1 I worked with leaders in industry, academia, and government to formulate recom-
mendations that would be adopted by Congress, the administration, and departments and 
agencies.
We were successful, but this effort did not go far enough. That is why I continue to advocate 
for major legislation (such as the United States Innovation and Competition Act and the 
America COMPETES Act), to develop the next phase of implementable policy options 
(through the recently launched Special Competitive Studies Project), to support bold and 
ambitious research on the hardest AI problems (via my new AI2050 initiative), and to el -
evate public discussion (in my latest book, The Age of AI, with Henry Kissinger and Daniel 
Huttenlocher).
Still, there is so much more work to do to secure America’s technological future in the 
context of a rising China. Given the high stakes and dizzying complexity of the challenges, 
many U.S. leaders are still searching for a mental framework—a set of analytical tools 
to help them answer the most fundamental questions of strategy and policy. The China 
Strategy Group, a bipartisan group of thinkers and doers I convened with Jared Cohen in 
2020, sought to develop those kinds of frameworks. One of our key findings was that such 
profound national dilemmas call for deeper analysis by a broader range of independent 
voices.
That’s why I was so pleased to read Jon Bateman’s major new report, “U.S.-China 
T echnological ‘Decoupling’: A Strategy and Policy Framework.” Jon is a brilliant thinker 
who has written an exceptional guidebook and blueprint for U.S. action. His report builds 
on recommendations outlined by the NSCAI and the China Strategy Group. It’s a major 
achievement, and I strongly hope that policymakers pay attention to it.
There is no shortage of analysis today on U.S.-China tech policy, but Jon’s report stands 
out for its ambition, clarity, and rigor. T o start with, he avoids two of the biggest and most 
common pitfalls: offering hazy strategic ideas without explaining how to implement them,

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
JON BATEMAN xi 
or cataloging a laundry list of policies without any discernible strategy. Instead, Jon draws 
a straight line from the heights of American grand strategy to the trenches of agency deci -
sionmaking. With this methodical approach he outlines a smart, achievable agenda for a 
remarkable range of U.S. national security and economic goals. I particularly appreciated 
Jon’s prolific use of case studies to ground his proposals in technological reality.
Jon is not afraid to stake a position, and some of my favorite parts of his report were those 
that I disagreed with. He argues, for example, that the military importance of AI may be 
overestimated—or, at least, that the era of what China calls “intelligentized warfare” is 
probably still a long way away. I’ll take the other side of that bet, but I still found Jon’s anal-
ysis to be evenhanded and thought-provoking. And at this perilous moment in U.S. history, 
we simply can’t afford groupthink. With calls for a hard “decoupling” getting louder, fewer 
people are willing to say (or even ask) where it all ends. Jon is one of those people, and I 
applaud him for it.
The paradoxes of the U.S.-China tech relationship are not going away. The United States 
will need to continually reassess whether and how to remain interdependent with our major 
international rival. The decisions will be difficult, the debates heated. Jon’s report is among 
the best guides I have seen and will remain a touchstone for years to come.
Eric Schmidt 
Co-founder, Schmidt Futures 
Chair, Special Competitive Studies Project 
Former CEO & Chairman, Google

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
1 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
A partial “decoupling”2 of U.S. and Chinese technology ecosystems is well underway. Beijing 
plays an active role in this process, as do other governments and private actors around the 
world. But the U.S. government has been a primary driver in recent years with its increased 
use of technology restrictions: export controls, divestment orders, licensing denials, visa 
bans, sanctions, tariffs, and the like. There is bipartisan support for at least some bolster -
ing of U.S. tech controls, particularly for so-called strategic technologies, where Chinese 
advancement or influence could most threaten America’s national security and economic 
interests. But what exactly are these strategic technologies, and how hard should the U.S. 
government push to control them? Where 
is the responsible stopping point—the 
line beyond which technology restrictions 
aimed at China do more harm than good 
to America?
These are vexing questions with few, if any, 
clear answers. Yet the United States cannot 
afford simply to muddle through techno -
logical decoupling, one of the most consequential global trends of the early twenty-first cen-
tury. The U.S. technology base—foundational to national well-being and power—is thor -
oughly enmeshed with China in a larger, globe-spanning technological web. Cutting many 
strands of this web to reweave them into new patterns will be daunting and dangerous. 
Without a clear strategy, the U.S. government risks doing too little or—more likely—too 
much to curb technological interdependence with China. In particular, Washington may 
accidentally set in motion a chaotic, runaway decoupling that it cannot predict or control.
The United States cannot 
afford simply to muddle through 
technological “decoupling,” one of 
the most consequential global trends 
of the early twenty-first century.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
2 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Sharper thinking and more informed debates are needed to develop a coherent, durable 
strategy. T oday, disparate U.S. objectives are frequently lumped together into amorphous 
constructs like “technology competition.” Familiar terms like “supply chain security” often 
fail to clarify such basic matters as which U.S. interests must be secured and why. Important 
decisions are siloed within opaque forums (like the Committee on Foreign Investment 
in the United States [CFIUS]), narrow specialties (like export control law), or individual 
industries (like semiconductors), concealing the bigger picture. The traditional concerns 
of “tech policy” and “China policy” receive outsized attention, while second-order implica-
tions in other areas (such as climate policy) get short shrift. And as China discourse in the 
United States becomes more politically charged, arguments for preserving technology ties 
are increasingly muted or not voiced at all.
This report aims to address these gaps and show how American leaders can navigate the 
vast, perilous, largely unmapped terrain of technological decoupling. First, it gives an over-
view of U.S. thinking and policy—describing how U.S. views on Chinese technology have 
evolved in recent years and explaining the many tools that Washington uses to curb U.S.-
China technological interdependence. Second, it frames the major strategic choices fac -
ing U.S. leaders—summarizing three proposed strategies for technological decoupling and 
advocating a middle path that preserves and expands America’s options. Third, it translates 
this strategy into implementable policies and processes—proposing specific objectives for 
U.S. federal agencies and identifying the technology areas where government controls are 
(or are not) warranted. The report also highlights many domestic investments and other 
self-improvement measures that must go hand in hand with restrictive action.
THE EVOLUTION OF U.S. THINKING AND POLICY
The U.S. government’s interest in technological decoupling has risen dramatically since the 
mid-2010s. During this period, Beijing’s growing strength and more troubling behavior 
at home and abroad led U.S. leaders to revise their views of China, deeming it America’s 
primary state threat. At the same time, techno-nationalist ideas—depicting technology as 
an arena for interstate struggle rather than a neutral global marketplace—became ascendant 
around the world and eventually prevailed in Washington. T ogether, these two trends pro-
duced a new American techno-nationalism focused principally on China. It first took shape 
during former president Barack Obama’s second term, was elevated and implemented un -
der former president Donald T rump, and has been largely embraced by President Joe Biden.
Early U.S. actions were mainly “defensive”: restrictive measures aimed at thwarting or contain-
ing Chinese technology threats. Export and import controls, inbound and outbound invest-
ment restrictions, telecommunications and electronics licensing regimes, visa bans, financial 
sanctions, technology transaction rules, federal spending limits, and law enforcement actions 
have more frequently and intensively targeted China. Lately, Washington has increased its

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
JON BATEMAN 3 
focus on “offensive” measures—positive actions to nurture America’s own technological 
strength, such as investments in research and development (R&D) and education. Yet despite 
this offensive pivot, defensive measures continue to multiply and raise some of the most acute 
policy dilemmas. For example, cracking down on illicit Chinese technology transfer at U.S. 
universities can chill valuable scientific collaboration, and banning Chinese technologies on 
national security grounds may prompt Beijing (or others) to broaden their own trade barriers.
U.S. policymakers must have a firm grasp of the many different tools used to curb bilat -
eral technology interdependence. Defensive tools are often described generically as “sanc -
tions” or “blacklists,” but this conflates distinct legal authorities with a range of effects and 
implementing agencies. For example, SenseTime and Hytera are among the Chinese tech 
firms most targeted by U.S. controls, yet the restrictions imposed on each company do not 
overlap at all. Huawei, meanwhile, suffers from nearly all of the controls placed on both 
SenseTime and Hytera, plus others that are completely unique. T o clarify the picture, this 
report offers a primer on key U.S. defensive authorities and how they have targeted the 
Chinese tech sector.
Under U.S. law, officials have vast discretion to impose technological decoupling. They 
need only invoke pliable concepts like “national security” or “the public interest” to restrict 
how technology products, services, and inputs move between America and China. Most 
restrictive powers have been used to a small fraction of their full decoupling potential. At 
the same time, restrictive authorities are fragmented across multiple agencies and policy 
domains. This combination of great power and great complexity increases the risk that U.S. 
technology controls will be poorly conceived or work at cross-purposes. It is therefore essen-
tial to develop a government-wide strategy that can prevent overreach and align disparate 
elements into a coherent whole.
CHOOSING A STRATEGY
A U.S. strategy for decoupling should envision the kind of technology relationship that 
America hopes to have with China, provide a rationale for this vision, and explain how it 
can be made into reality. A sound strategy would start with a multidimensional assessment 
of U.S.-China tech ties and their wide-ranging effects on diverse American interests. In 
fact, a strategy for technological decoupling should consider more than just tech-specific or 
China-specific concerns. It should be rooted in a larger U.S. grand strategy that reconciles 
decoupling with other national priorities, from international trade to domestic political stabil-
ity to global climate change, that might be impacted directly or indirectly. Washington still 
lacks such a decoupling strategy, even as it continually imposes new tech controls on China.
Leading proposals can be grouped into three general camps. First, a “restrictionist” camp 
believes that the U.S.-China technology relationship is zero-sum and that it tends to favor

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
4 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Beijing, necessitating dramatic curtailment of bilateral tech ties. This group—including 
China hawks, some human rights defenders, and many national security officials—fears 
U.S. complacency during what it sees as a closing window to prevent China’s technological 
dominance. Second, a “cooperationist” camp perceives U.S.-China tech ties as non-zero-
sum and largely beneficial to America, casting doubt on key elements of Washington’s de-
coupling agenda. This group—including many business interests, techno-globalist activists, 
and some progressives—fears U.S. overreaction, inflated threat perceptions, and excessive 
confidence in restrictive tools.
Third, a “centrist” camp identifies the U.S.-China tech relationship as complex and un -
certain, with both zero-sum and non-zero-sum elements and mixed costs and benefits for 
both countries. Centrists want focused, finely tuned defensive measures plus large offensive 
investments. This group—including many mainstream think tank analysts, moderate po -
litical figures, and some state and local leaders—fears U.S. incapacity to balance interdepen-
dence and decoupling. Key capacity challenges include securing public-private coordina -
tion, mapping complex supply chains, and overcoming Washington gridlock, polarization, 
and bureaucratic clumsiness.
The United States should adopt a centrist strategy. The very existence of a heated debate 
among these three camps is itself an argument for the careful incrementalism that centrists 
espouse. We are still in the early years of a radically new phase in U.S.-China relations and 
only on the cusp of far-reaching global transformations promised by artificial intelligence 
(AI) and other emerging technologies. These coming changes, although unquestionably 
significant, remain difficult for present-day observers to assess. Policymakers should play 
for more time—preserving and expanding American options while the future comes into 
sharper focus.
The primary effort should be “offensive”: new investments and incentives to bolster and 
diversify innovation pathways, supply chains, talent pipelines, and revenue models in stra-
tegic technology areas. The United States has far more influence over its own technological 
strength than it has over China’s, and such investments act as a hedge against multiple sce-
narios. They can prepare America for full-scope technological decoupling with fewer costs 
and risks, should that become necessary, or they can position U.S. firms to compete better 
in a still-globalized technology marketplace.
Because offensive investments are challenging to implement and take a long time to pay off, 
fast-acting “defensive” restrictions should be used to buy time. Washington should insti -
tute controls in technology areas where China seems close to securing unique, strategically 
significant, and long-lasting advantages. Defensive measures can help to forestall Chinese 
breakthroughs long enough for U.S. offensive efforts to bear fruit.
However, restrictive tools should be confined to a secondary, supporting role and only 
used in compelling circumstances. T echnology restrictions can be costly (harming U.S.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
JON BATEMAN 5 
industries and innovators), imprecise (chilling more activity than intended), and even futile 
(failing to remedy the relevant Chinese tech threats). Restrictive tools by themselves can -
not ensure U.S. technological preeminence over the long haul, but they can and should 
frustrate Chinese dominance in the short run, preserving competitive opportunities while 
America regroups and regains momentum in key technology areas.
A centrist strategy of this kind will 
also help the U.S. government 
maintain its control over the de -
coupling process—keeping its pace 
and scope aligned with American 
needs. U.S. policymakers have en -
joyed the luxury of control during 
recent years, as Washington took 
the initiative while Beijing, other governments, and private entities around the world were 
comparably cautious and reactive in technological decoupling. But as decoupling acceler -
ates, these outside actors increasingly seek to seize initiative for themselves—for example, 
preempting future U.S. restrictions by acting first to reduce technology interdependence on 
their own terms. Meanwhile, decoupling has slowly begun to shift power within the United 
States toward political figures, commercial actors, and national security voices who advocate 
even stronger restrictive measures.
These dynamics create risks of unanticipated escalatory spirals. Washington might aim for 
a modest level of decoupling but end up with something broader, faster, and messier. In 
a worst-case scenario, the United States could accidentally set in motion a frenzied, ever-
intensifying cycle of decoupling that races well ahead of what the nation can afford. A 
centrist strategy can minimize this risk by ensuring that technology restrictions are targeted 
and precise. The United States must then communicate this strategic intention, and share 
more details of specific policies, to help stabilize expectations in China and elsewhere. Such 
clarity cuts against the grain for U.S. leaders, who like to preserve their own discretion and 
struggle to make credible commitments across presidential administrations. But in a com -
plex and interdependent global technology landscape, silence or ambiguity may actually 
cede control to others.
TRANSLATING STRATEGY INTO POLICY AND PROCESS
Any U.S. strategy—whether restrictionist, cooperationist, or centrist—must be translated 
into policies and processes to guide agency-level decisions. This is no simple task. It requires 
evaluating a host of technology areas, weighing numerous costs and benefits through the lens 
of multiple expert disciplines. Meaningful guidance must move past generalities and express 
clear policy choices, even in the face of uncertainty and a fraught domestic atmosphere. Thus, 
Restrictive tools by themselves 
cannot ensure U.S. technological 
preeminence over the long haul, but 
they can and should frustrate Chinese 
dominance in the short run.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
6 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
although many observers say that technological decoupling should be bounded and partial, 
there are few comprehensive, detailed proposals for how and where to draw such boundaries.
T o develop such guidance, this report unpacks the many U.S. interests at stake and pro -
poses nine policy objectives for technological decoupling. National security objectives in -
clude maintaining a military edge over China, limiting Chinese national security espionage, 
preventing Chinese sabotage in a crisis, limiting Chinese influence operations, and denying 
support for Chinese or China-enabled authoritarianism and repression. Economic objec -
tives include countering unfair Chinese practices and intellectual property (IP) theft, and 
competing and leading in strategic industries. Then there are ancillary objectives—non-
technology goals that also influence American decoupling policy: obtaining general leverage 
over China, and shaping U.S. domestic narratives. These nine objectives, although linked, 
raise many distinct issues and dilemmas. They cannot be treated as interchangeable re -
sponses to an undifferentiated mass of “Chinese tech threats”—an all-too-typical approach.
The next step, and the heart of this report, is a careful review of the role U.S. technology 
controls should play in achieving these policy objectives (see Table 1). Taking each objective 
in turn, the report weighs the risks and benefits of U.S.-China technological interdepen -
dence against the risks and benefits of U.S. government technology controls. This analy -
sis leads to a series of proposed dividing lines—implementable standards for determining 
which technologies warrant restrictions and which do not. Specific examples help illustrate 
how these dividing lines would work in practice. Offensive measures essential to each objec-
tive are also highlighted. By considering the full gamut of U.S. interests across many differ-
ent technology areas, the report shows what a centrist decoupling might look like and how 
agencies could implement it.
This step-by-step process demonstrates several points that bolster the case for a cen -
trist approach. First, the most strategically significant technologies (like 5G telecom -
munications equipment and semiconductors) are few in number and already subject 
to strong U.S. government controls. A handful of other technology areas may need 
tighter China-oriented restrictions—for example, drone swarms, the U.S. bulk pow -
er system, and technologies sold to Xinjiang. Yet certain China-focused controls 
seem counterproductive in a number of other high-profile areas, such as geolocation 
data, social media platforms, and consumer devices like smartphones. Second, offi -
cial U.S. policy goals remain dangerously vague and open-ended. T o avoid costly and 
quixotic technology wars, Washington must publicly clarify its vision for the global 
tech trade and set more achievable ambitions for countering techno-authoritarianism, 
maintaining a military edge over China, and preventing Chinese espionage, sabotage, and 
influence operations. Third, offensive policies have the greatest long-term potential for 
strengthening U.S. technology leadership, competitiveness, and resilience—and thereby 
achieving security and prosperity. Although technology restrictions are the primary subject 
of this report, they cannot be the primary focus of policymakers.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
JON BATEMAN 7 
Table 1: Overview of Recommended U.S. Policies
Proposed policy 
objective
Proposed standard for 
government tech controls
Illustrative policies Key offensive measures
NATIONAL SECURITY
Maintain a 
military edge 
over China
Slow China’s acquisition of 
technologies that could thwart 
U.S. defense planning 
objectives.
Consider controls for drone 
swarm hardware, but review 
sanctions on Chinese super- 
computing organizations.
Speed up U.S. force trans-
formation. Improve defense 
industrial base information and 
cybersecurity.
Limit Chinese 
national security 
espionage
Deny China insider access to 
U.S. personal data it cannot 
otherwise readily obtain, whose 
loss would be hard to remedy.
Continue blocking sale of 
American genetics firms to 
Chinese entities, but allow sale 
of firms with geolocation data.
Pass national cybersecurity 
and data privacy laws. Improve 
defensive counterintelligence for 
U.S. government officials.
Prevent Chinese 
sabotage in 
a crisis
Deny China a presence in sys-
tems that could disrupt major 
U.S. military contingencies or 
cause mass casualties 
or evacuations.
Reinstate ban on Chinese large 
power transformers, but narrow 
and clarify the sweeping ICTS 
supply chain security rule.
Invest in adversary-agnostic 
cybersecurity and all-hazards 
resilience of critical military and 
civilian systems.
Limit Chinese 
influence 
operations
Prevent China from swinging a 
federal election or significantly 
reducing public confidence in 
elections or pandemic 
measures.
Permit Chinese ownership and 
operation of TikTok pending 
further analysis. Do not force 
Chinese divestment from U.S. 
video game developers based on 
influence threats.
Repair U.S. information ecosys-
tem by regulating platforms, 
reforming election law, funding 
education and journalism, and 
facilitating basic research.
Deny support for 
China-enabled 
authoritarianism 
and repression
Avoid U.S. complicity in 
Beijing’s repression of 
minorities. Dissuade China 
from selling, and others 
from buying, repressive tech.
Sanction Chinese tech com-
panies that support Xinjiang 
security operations, but clarify 
the “surveillance technology 
sector” authority.
Press Americans, U.S. allies, 
and others on the use or sale of 
repressive tech. Model liberal 
democratic tech policies at home.
ECONOMIC
Counter unfair 
Chinese eco-
nomic practices 
and IP theft
Link U.S. technology controls to 
a comprehensive strategy for 
the international trade system.
Reconcile U.S. open trade 
aspirations with America’s tech-
related trade barriers and claims 
of a WTO “national security 
exception.”
Cultivate a united front among 
U.S. allies about the WTO’s 
future and China’s role within it.
Compete and 
lead in strategic 
industries
Prevent long-term Chinese 
dominance of tech industries 
expected to have the largest 
economic impact (and some 
national security nexus).
Maintain controls on 5G tele-
coms equipment, but generally 
avoid restricting AI software, 
smartphones, and Internet of 
Things on economic grounds.
Increase federal spending on 
R&D, STEM education and 
training, and innovation 
infrastructure. Step up 
antitrust scrutiny and reforms.
ANCILLARY
Obtain general 
leverage over 
China
Use technology restrictions as 
bargaining chips with Beijing in 
rare cases when they could 
advance supreme U.S. interests.
Consider leveraging Huawei 
sanctions to secure Chinese 
emissions reductions, but not 
to expand U.S. market access in 
non-technology sectors.
Build and sustain international 
coalitions to press China on key 
U.S. concerns.
Shape U.S. 
domestic 
narratives
Raise domestic awareness 
about technology threats 
from China while minimizing 
politicization.
Use regularized processes 
instead of executive orders. 
Empower oversight elements.
Carry out responsible, factual 
domestic messaging campaigns. 
Listen to domestic stakeholders.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
9 
THE EVOLUTION OF 
U.S. THINKING AND POLICY
In the last few years, the U.S. government has come to see technological interdependence 
with China as a major threat to American security, prosperity, and values. Washington fears 
that Beijing can leverage technological linkages to steal secrets, spread disinformation, sur-
veil dissidents, hold U.S. infrastructure hostage, and leap ahead in economic competition, 
among other threats. As a result, U.S. officials of both parties have sought to substantially—
though not completely—reduce the flow of technology products, services, and inputs to 
and from China. This process is sometimes called “technological decoupling.”3 Decoupling 
is not just a bilateral phenomenon, nor is it entirely the product of governmental policy. 
Many public and private sector actors around the world are contributing—in different 
ways, and with varying motivations and levels of enthusiasm—to the trend.
Although the overall trend toward technological decoupling is clear, its exact course and 
ultimate extent remain unknown. There are many possibilities. In an extreme scenario, de-
coupling widens and accelerates until distinct geo-technological spheres emerge—one cen-
tered on the United States, one centered on China, and perhaps others. Because technology 
is so intertwined with all commercial activity, such a technological split would drastically 
reduce every kind of economic interaction between China and the U.S.-aligned world. In 
the opposite scenario, U.S.-China technology ties gradually begin to stabilize, finding a 
new equilibrium that preserves the vast bulk of the global technology supply chain. Various 
other scenarios lie in between these two poles, and many international actors are vying to 
shape the future.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
10 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
The most important decisionmaker, for 
now, is the U.S. government. Washington 
has been a principal driver of recent techno-
logical decoupling with China and remains 
uniquely able to adjust this global trend 
up or down. By comparison, other ma -
jor actors have been more reactive. While 
Beijing has long maintained its own limits 
on American and other foreign technology, it has been more hesitant than Washington to 
add significant new technology restrictions in recent years. China still appears interested 
in retaining many of the technological links it has built over decades, at least until it can 
position itself for greater self-sufficiency. Beijing has therefore responded in a cautious, 
reciprocal manner to many U.S. tech restrictions (though it is gradually becoming more 
assertive). Other governments and private sector players have diverse views on technologi -
cal decoupling, yet very few are as forward-leaning as the U.S. government, and none has 
pushed the trend as forcefully and effectively.
A NEW CONVENTIONAL WISDOM
T wo broad trends have driven the U.S. government’s recent interest in technological decou-
pling. First, beginning in the mid-2010s, U.S. policymakers and political leaders developed 
much darker views of China. Previously, most in Washington had believed that China’s rise 
was largely compatible with and even beneficial to American interests. Although Beijing’s 
human rights abuses, market distortions, and other behavior were always points of fric -
tion, U.S. officials in the 1990s and 2000s thought the best solutions were further integra-
tion of China into global institutions and deepening of bilateral political and economic 
engagement.4
This official consensus, never without dissenters, eroded and eventually collapsed during 
the Obama administration. Major catalysts included China’s militarization of disputed is -
lands and broader military buildup; its unrelenting intellectual property theft and exploi -
tation of international trade rules to move up the economic value chain; its deepening 
authoritarianism and abhorrent repression of Uyghurs and other minority groups; and its 
bolder encroachments on Hong Kong and Taiwan. 5 Across the board, China seemed in -
creasingly intent on and capable of challenging U.S. interests, values, and visions of global 
order. These developments caused a sea change in U.S. thinking on China. Within a few 
short years, cautious optimism or ambivalence turned into distress and fear, and most U.S. 
policymakers came to identify Beijing as America’s primary long-term state threat (see Table 
2). As a result, U.S. leaders belatedly started to scrutinize the many ways their country had 
become dependent on or supportive of China in prior decades—with technology rightly 
emerging as a central concern.
The U.S. government has 
been a principal driver of recent 
technological decoupling with China 
and remains uniquely able to adjust 
this global trend up or down.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
JON BATEMAN 11 
Table 2: U.S. Rhetoric on China Has Shifted Dramatically Over a Decade
2010
Obama National Security Strategy
“We will continue to pursue a positive, constructive, and comprehensive 
relationship with China.”
2015
Obama National Security Strategy
“The scope of our cooperation with China is unprecedented even as we remain alert.”
2015
Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter, 
Obama White House
“A return to great power competition,” though “nothing is preordained about 
this relationship.”
2017
Trump National Security Strategy
“China . . . want[s] to shape a world antithetical to U.S. values and interests.”
2020
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo
“The Chinese Communist Party[’s] actions are the primary challenge today in 
the free world.”
2021
Secretary of State Antony Blinken
“Our relationship with China will be competitive when it should be, collaborative 
when it can be, and adversarial when it must be.”
Sources: “National Security Strategy,” White House, May 2010, https:/ / obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/ default/
files/rss_viewer/national_security_strategy.pdf; White House, “National Security Strategy,” February 2015, https:/ /
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/ default/files/ docs/2015_national_security_strategy_2.pdf; David B. Larter, 
“White House Tells the Pentagon to Quit Talking About ‘Competition’ With China,” Navy Times, September 26, 2016, 
https:/ /www.navytimes.com/news/your-navy/2016/09/26/white-house-tells-the-pentagon-to-quit-talking-about-
competition-with-china/; Michael R. Pompeo, “Communist China and the Free World’s Future,” State Department, 
July 23, 2020, https:/ /2017-2021.state.gov/ communist-china-and-the-free-worlds-future-2/index.html; Antony J. 
Blinken, “A Foreign Policy for the American People,” State Department, March 3, 2021, https:/ /www.state.gov/ a-
foreign-policy-for-the-american-people/ .
Second, during roughly the same period, techno-nationalist ideas became ascendant around 
the world and eventually took hold in the United States. By the 2010s, digital technologies 
such as online platforms, mobile devices and apps, streaming media, and targeted advertis-
ing had matured into powerful new global industries, unsettling previous economic struc -
tures. Some tech firms, like social media companies, even subsumed state-like functions—
setting terms for public discourse and determining when and how governments could access 
their own citizens’ private information. Digital technologies also came to have great value in 
espionage and warfare. Because the most globally successful tech companies were American, 
China and many other countries bristled at the entrenchment and extension of U.S. influ-
ence. They sought ways to claw back some measure of digital sovereignty—especially after 
Edward Snowden’s disclosures about U.S. surveillance.
Washington was more sanguine at first. It had long extolled the digital globalization led by 
U.S.-based multinational tech companies, which enriched Silicon Valley and empowered 
America on the world stage. But an onslaught of major cyber and influence operations by

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
12 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
foreign actors, including China, gradually convinced U.S. leaders that America’s digital 
openness was also a vulnerability.6 Meanwhile, there was growing apprehension about the 
next wave of emerging tech, especially machine learning and 5G. These innovations were 
said to be even more transformative than previous digital technologies—but this time, 
China would rival or even surpass Western capabilities, in part due to Beijing’s organized 
exploitation of its technological links with the West. Washington finally realized what other 
governments already understood: technology had become a key arena of interstate compe-
tition that could not simply be left to the marketplace. U.S. technology would need to be 
better protected from adversaries and more closely aligned with national strategy.
These two trends gave birth to a new American techno-nationalism focused principally on 
China. The basic ideas began to take shape during former president Barack Obama’s second 
term and drove a few early regulatory actions.7 The T rump administration then went much 
further, elevating techno-nationalist thought within U.S. strategy and rhetoric and greatly 
expanding the number and scope of measures targeting Chinese tech threats. President Joe 
Biden, while making some tactical adjustments, has largely followed suit so far. There is 
now bipartisan consensus that the U.S. government must take a lead role in organizing the 
American technology ecosystem to reduce its interdependence with China.
PAST PRECEDENTS
T oday’s American techno-nationalism is not wholly unprecedented. In fact, much of the 
institutional architecture that Washington now uses to nurture and protect U.S. technol -
ogy strength originated during two prior techno-nationalist periods. Early in the Cold War, 
U.S. leaders recognized that science and engineering would be key factors in America’s 
military and geopolitical struggle with the Soviet Union. Thus they created the National 
Science Foundation, spent extraordinary sums on the Space Race, used defense contracts 
to seed what would become Silicon Valley, expanded the federal role in higher education, 
and worked with allies to establish the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export 
Controls (COCOM).8 By the time the Cold War was receding in the late 1980s and early 
1990s, Japan had emerged as a fierce economic and technological competitor to the United 
States. This spurred another wave of U.S. techno-nationalist policies, including the cre -
ation of SEMATECH, a public-private partnership with the domestic semiconductor in -
dustry, and the Exon-Florio Amendment, which transformed the Committee on Foreign 
Investment in the United States from a sleepy study group into a powerful regulator of 
cross-border deals.9
These earlier periods of techno-nationalism, which are still being debated, offer many po -
tential lessons for today’s U.S. policymakers. 10 Yet historical analogies should be treated 
with caution, as they fail to capture unique features of the current China challenge. The 
United States has successfully contested a geopolitical adversary (the Soviet Union) and a

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
JON BATEMAN 13 
modern technological competitor (Japan), but it must now face a single rival that plays both 
these roles at once and has more latent capacity than either of its predecessors.
China’s economy could become the 
world’s largest in a decade, and it is already 
about 70 percent as big as America’s in 
nominal terms—roughly equal to Japan’s 
peak proportion (in 1995) and perhaps 
twice the share (or more) ever achieved by 
the Soviet Union.11 China’s population is 
more than four times that of the United 
States, whereas the Soviet Union was only 
slightly larger than America, and Japan 
much smaller. 12 Of course, China lacks 
the Soviet Union’s world-class nuclear arsenal and large network of allies, client states, and 
ideological bedfellows. And Beijing has fought no proxy wars in recent decades. Yet its deep 
economic and technological integration with the U.S.-aligned world grants it opportuni -
ties that the Kremlin never had, creating novel dilemmas for Washington. And while the 
Chinese economy faces serious demographic, financial, and political risks in the years to 
come, Beijing’s signature brand of state-guided capitalism appears more dynamic and resil-
ient than the creaky machinery of Soviet central planning.
The technological landscape has also changed a great deal since the mid-to-late twentieth 
century. Then, the U.S. government was a leading innovator in its own right and “spun off” 
many breakthroughs to the private sector. Now, private companies develop the most excit-
ing new technologies while the public sector scrambles to understand and absorb them. 
Then, Washington had relatively cozy relationships with large American companies—as 
expressed in the famous (though hyperbolic) claim that “what was good for our country 
was good for General Motors, and vice versa.” 13 T oday, major U.S.-based tech firms are 
vast, multinational, digital-physical enterprises with complex loyalties and their own for -
eign policies.14
The American nation has also changed, as has the world and the U.S. role within it. 
Domestic social cohesion, governance capacity, and political stability have plummeted. 15 
U.S. leaders now struggle to do anything big at home, or even to rally the country in the 
face of foreign threats. Looking outward, Washington confronts a more multipolar system 
and a somewhat strained set of alliances. America still leads, but with diminished influence, 
credibility, and prestige. T oday’s world is also much more interconnected, thanks in large 
part to decades of U.S.-driven globalization. Collaborative scientific research and interna -
tional technology supply chains span the globe, creating efficiencies never before possible. 
But this interconnectedness also comes with looming, systemic risks: global climate change, 
global financial crises, global pandemics, global supply chain disruptions, and global cyber 
The United States has successfully 
contested a geopolitical adversary 
(the Soviet Union) and a modern 
technological competitor (Japan). 
But China now plays both these roles 
and has more latent capacity than 
either predecessor.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
14 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
incidents, among others.16 Global challeng-
es demand global cooperation, yet interna-
tional institutions have struggled to meet 
the moment.
In short, U.S. leaders find themselves in 
uncharted territory. Although America 
has a rich heritage of techno-nationalist 
thought and policy to draw upon and learn 
from, today’s circumstances are quite different from those faced by previous generations. 
T echno-nationalism must be reconsidered for a radically changed world. This means look-
ing with fresh eyes at familiar strategies and policies.
“OFFENSIVE” AND “DEFENSIVE” MEASURES
U.S. techno-nationalist policies are often divided into two groups. “Defensive” measures 
aim to thwart and contain technology threats from China, while “offensive” measures seek 
to nurture America’s own technological strength. During the T rump era, policymakers in 
the administration and Congress overwhelmingly focused on defensive measures, such as 
export controls, investment restrictions, and the denial of visas and regulatory licenses for 
Chinese workers, students, and businesses. While defensive measures are still being actively 
developed and deployed, there is now some consensus—among Biden administration of -
ficials, members of Congress, and outside policy experts—that offensive measures deserve 
far more attention. This shift can be seen in bills like the U.S. Innovation and Competition 
Act and the America COMPETES Act, two mammoth pieces of draft legislation. Although 
the bills contain multiple defensive measures, they focus primarily on offensive goals like 
funding and facilitating R&D.
That said, defensive measures continue to raise some of the most acute policy dilemmas. 
On the one hand, these tools provide uniquely powerful means for Washington to reshape 
the bilateral technology relationship. Regulations and other coercive federal powers can be 
used to quickly sever technology links deemed unduly risky. This obviates the need for U.S. 
leaders to cajole American businesses or universities with patriotic appeals, to place faith in 
blind market forces that may not align with national policy, or to negotiate directly with 
the Chinese government or (sometimes) with other governments. Moreover, the executive 
branch can often impose defensive measures on its own initiative, without the need for new 
statutes or spending bills from Congress.
However, defensive measures can come with significant costs and risks. They may cut off—
perhaps abruptly—key sources of labor, supplies, and funds that U.S. businesses and uni -
Techno-nationalism must 
be reconsidered for a radically 
changed world. This means looking 
with fresh eyes at familiar 
strategies and policies.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
JON BATEMAN 15 
versities depend on to develop and deploy important technologies.17 Defensive actions may 
provoke China’s ire, triggering various forms of retaliation and further damaging a sensitive 
bilateral relationship. Allies and trading partners may also object to or resist U.S. actions 
that disrupt global technology supply chains. Moreover, each new defensive measure raises 
the possibility of still more restrictions in the future, causing outside actors to try to get 
ahead of U.S. policy and thereby increasing the risk of a decoupling spiral that exceeds U.S. 
tolerances.
Thus, while U.S. leaders rightly refocus their attention on offensive actions to promote 
American technological strength from within, they must also make difficult decisions about 
the role of defensive measures. Washington must find a delicate balance that addresses 
legitimate concerns about Chinese technology while avoiding overreach and self-sabotage.
There are many kinds of defensive tools, and U.S. policymakers must have a firm grasp 
of their differences (see Table 3). Defensive tools are often described generically as “sanc -
tions” or “blacklists,” but this conflates distinct legal authorities with a range of effects and 
implementing agencies. For example, SenseTime and Hytera are among the Chinese tech 
firms most targeted by U.S. controls, yet the restrictions imposed on each company do not 
overlap at all. Huawei, meanwhile, suffers from nearly all of the controls placed on both 
SenseTime and Hytera, plus others that are completely unique (see Table 4 at the end of 
the chapter).
What follows is a primer on key U.S. government authorities that have been, or could be, used 
to curb the flow of technology to and from China. It seeks to outline, in a slightly simplified 
form, the most important legal authorities. It describes which agencies are involved, what 
discretion they have, and how the Chinese tech sector has been targeted in recent years.18
Table 3: Washington’s Large and Growing Tool Kit of Technology Restrictions
Pre-2017 Authorities Major China-Related Developments Since 2017
Export 
Controls
 • International Traffic in Arms Regula-
tions (including U.S. Munitions List)
 • Export Administration Regulations 
(including Commerce Control List, 
Entity List, deemed export restrictions, 
foreign direct product and de minimis 
rules)
 • Export Control Reform Act mandated emerging and founda-
tional technology controls
 • Military end user (MEU)/end use restrictions tightened and 
MEU List created
 • Entity List greatly expanded
 • Foreign direct product rule tightened for Huawei
 • Civilian exception rescinded
 • Hong Kong’s preferential treatment ended

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
16 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Pre-2017 Authorities Major China-Related Developments Since 2017
Investment 
Restrictions
 • Committee on Foreign Investment in 
the United States (CFIUS)
 • CFIUS activity increased
 • Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act passed
 • Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List 
created
 • Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act passed
T elecoms 
Licensing and 
Equipment 
Authorizations
 • Carrier public interest certificate
 • Submarine cable landing licensing
 • Radio frequency equipment 
authorization (technically based)
 • Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Act created the 
FCC’s Covered List
 • Team Telecom formalized
 • Chinese carrier and cable landing licenses denied or revoked
 • Secure Equipment Act barred radio frequency equipment on 
national security grounds
Visa 
Restrictions
 • Section 212(a)(3)(C) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA)
 • Section 212(f) of the INA
 • Visa ban instituted for graduate students and researchers tied 
to military-civil fusion
 • Certain Huawei employees barred
 • Chinese Communist Party members restricted
Import 
Restrictions
 • Antidumping duties
 • Countervailing duties
 • Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930
 • Broad-based tariffs imposed under a revived Section 301 of 
the Trade Act of 1974
 • Steel and aluminum tariffs imposed under a revived Section 
232(b) of the Trade Expansion Act
 • DJI drones and Hytera radios excluded (the former later 
rescinded)
 • Xinjiang-made goods presumptively banned
Financial 
Sanctions
 • International Emergency Economic 
Powers Act and National Emergen-
cies Act
 • Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) 
List
 • Global Magnitsky Act
 • Chinese actors placed on SDN list for human rights abuses, 
corruption, and Hong Kong repression
 • U.S. Innovation and Competition Act passed Senate (would 
mandate further sanctions on Chinese actors)
T echnology 
Transaction 
Rules
 • International Emergency Economic 
Powers Act and National Emergen-
cies Act
 • “App bans” attempted on TikTok, WeChat, and others (later 
rescinded)
 • Bulk power system order instituted (later rescinded)
 • Information and communications technology or services 
(ICTS) supply chain security rule enacted
Federal Use 
and Spending 
Restrictions
 • Various • Drone use and purchase restricted
 • Section 889 of the 2019 National Defense Authorization Act 
restricted government and contractor use of Chinese tech
 • “Remove and replace” rule enacted
Law 
Enforcement
 • Federal investigation and prosecution • China Initiative announced (later ended)
 • Nontraditional collector cases prosecuted

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
JON BATEMAN 17 
EXPORT CONTROLS
U.S. export controls restrict the transfer of sensitive goods, services, and data to foreign coun-
tries. There are multiple, overlaying export control regimes administered by different federal 
agencies with distinct legal authorities. In general, controls can target the item being exported 
(as in “list-based” controls), the country an item is being sent to (as in economic embargoes), 
an item’s ultimate recipient (as in end-user or end-use controls), or some combination. Export 
controls vary in their restrictiveness, from 
total bans to permissive licensing processes. 
The government’s criteria for granting or de-
nying licenses is a key determinant of an ex-
port control’s practical impact, though such 
criteria are often opaque to the public.19
U.S. law requires that export controls be 
justified on national security and foreign 
policy grounds.20 Common rationales for export controls include maintenance of U.S. mil-
itary superiority, nonproliferation of WMDs, and promotion of human rights. However, 
the concept of “national security” is subject to interpretation and might conceivably include 
an economic component. For example, the Export Control Reform Act (ECRA) of 2018 
proclaims that U.S. national security “requires that the United States maintain its leadership 
in the science, technology, engineering, and manufacturing sectors, including foundational 
technology that is essential to innovation,” and that “such leadership requires that United 
States persons are competitive in global markets.”21 Congress passed ECRA in large part due 
to concerns about Chinese technological advancement.22
For military items, the primary export control regime is the International Traffic in Arms 
Regulations (ITAR), administered by the Department of State. ITAR includes a list-based 
control called the U.S. Munitions List (USML) . Despite its name, the USML encom -
passes a great deal beyond munitions, including military electronics, military cryptographic 
systems, electronic intelligence systems such as offensive cyber capabilities, and a variety of 
technical data.23 The current list reflects a ten-year effort by the State Department to de-list 
“less sensitive items” and transfer them to more permissive regulatory regimes.24 The USML 
is now meant to cover only “those items that provide the United States with a critical mili-
tary or intelligence advantage or, in the case of weapons, perform an inherently military 
function.”25 Nothing on the USML may be exported to China.26 And in 2020, then presi-
dent Donald T rump ordered that Hong Kong be treated as part of China under U.S. export 
control (and other) laws—effectively barring the transshipment of USML items through 
this global trading hub and port city.27
Civilian, dual-use, and less sensitive military items are governed by the Export 
Administration Regulations (EAR), which the Department of Commerce administers. 28 
U.S. law requires that export 
controls be justified on national 
security grounds. However, “national 
security” might conceivably include 
an economic component.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
18 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
The EAR has multiple components, including a list-based regime called the Commerce 
Control List (CCL) . Each item on the CCL has one or more “reasons for control” that 
explain the listing’s justification and determine which countries it affects. Relatively few 
reasons for control apply to Canada, for example—only those based on chemical and bio -
logical weapons nonproliferation or the Inter-American Firearms Convention. China, by 
contrast, is subject to a variety of control categories, including those tied to regional stabil-
ity, missile proliferation, policing abuses, and broad national security concerns.29 The CCL 
contains—among many other items—certain software, technology, and manufacturing 
equipment used to design and produce semiconductors, some of which requires a license to 
be exported to China.30
The Commerce Department says that “generally, the licensing policy for China is to approve 
items for civil end use to civil end users.”31 However, differentiating civil from military (or 
dual-use) applications in China is no simple matter. Consider the EAR rule, adopted in 
2020, that restricts certain exports—including “low-level electronics” and “mass market en-
cryption hardware and software (such as laptops and smartphones)”—destined for Chinese 
“military end uses” and “military end users.”32 The latter category includes “any person 
or entity whose actions or functions are intended to support ‘ military end uses.’”33 The na-
ture and extent of such support, and its relationship to the exported item, are not explicitly 
defined. Thus, under a strict reading of this language, U.S. companies might need to obtain 
a license before “supplying non-sensitive, broadly available items to Chinese companies for 
civilian applications” if those Chinese companies also happen to do business, however little, 
with the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) or its affiliates. 34 The Commerce Department 
publishes a Military End User (MEU) List to aid in due diligence, but it is nonexhaustive, 
meaning that a recipient’s absence from the list provides no guarantee that an export would 
be legal.35 As of yet, the MEU List does not include any well-known Chinese commercial 
technology firms.
The Export Control Reform Act also calls for an effort to identify and control “emerg-
ing and foundational technologies” that “are essential to the national security of the 
United States.”36 Congress drafted this provision in large part to prevent China from gain-
ing early access to potentially important U.S. technology. However, the executive branch 
has struggled to define a set of “emerging and foundational technologies” that warrant 
export controls yet are not already subject to them. The T rump administration initially 
considered controls on a wide swath of “emerging” tech areas prioritized by Beijing’s Made 
in China 2025 plan, including genetic engineering, AI, additive manufacturing, robotics, 
and advanced materials. 37 But U.S. businesses and universities pushed back hard against 
the notion of controlling such broad and commercially important categories. As a result, 
the Commerce Department opted to impose only a few narrow controls related to chemi -
cal and biological weapons development, high-end semiconductor manufacturing, and ad-
vanced digital forensics and lawful intercept.38

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
JON BATEMAN 19 
The Commerce Department also administers the Entity List , an end-user-based control 
that targets foreign companies and other entities involved in “activities contrary to the na -
tional security or foreign policy interests of the United States.”39 Designated entities can be 
barred from importing any items “subject to the EAR” (including almost any U.S.-origin 
product); the exporter must first obtain a license, which may be subject to presumptive 
denial.40 China has been a growing focus of the Entity List (see Figure 1). The number 
of unique China-based entries has quadrupled since 2018, from 130 to 532. 41 Four years 
ago, China comprised only 14 percent of the Entity List; today, it accounts for 29 percent. 
Nearly half of the Entity List’s overall growth during that period came from new Chinese 
entries. The list now includes many of China’s leaders in areas such as telecommunica -
tions (Huawei), AI (SenseTime, Megvii, iFLYTEK), semiconductors (SMIC, HiSilicon, 
Phytium), digital cameras (Hikvision, Dahua), drones (DJI), cybersecurity (Qihoo 360), 
and supercomputers (China’s National Supercomputing Centers). These tech leaders were 
generally cited for supporting China’s human rights violations—particularly in Xinjiang—
or its military advancement.
Figure 1: The Entity List Is Increasingly Focused on China
 
Source: Author’s analysis of the Commerce Department’s Entity List spreadsheet available at https:/ /www.bis.doc 
.gov/index.php/ documents/ consolidated-entity-list/1072-el-2.
Note: China figures include Hong Kong. Entries with exact duplicate names were excluded, but entries for close varia -
tions of names, aliases, subsidiaries, and affiliates were included. Undated entries were assumed to predate 2018.
As of January 2018 As of March 2022
0
200
1,000
1,600
1,800
UNIQUE ENTRIES
FIGURE 1
The Entity List Is Increasingly Focused on China
SOURCE: Author’s analysis of the Commerce Department’s Entity List spreadsheet available at 
https:/ /www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/ documents/ consolidated-entity-list/1072-el-2.
1,400
1,200
400
600
800
Non-China-based entries
China-based entries
790
1,305
130
532

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
20 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
The EAR mainly governs U.S.-origin items—whether exported from the United States, re-
exported from one foreign country to another, or transferred within a foreign country.42 But 
the regulations also cover some foreign-origin goods that have a nexus with controlled U.S. 
material. T wo kinds of foreign products are deemed “subject to the EAR,” which means 
they cannot be re-exported to companies on the Entity List without a license. The first kind 
is foreign items that incorporate, or are comingled with, a threshold amount of controlled 
U.S.-origin content. 43 For re-exports to China and most other countries, the usual “de 
minimis” threshold is 25 percent of an item’s fair market value. In other words, a Japanese 
computer costing $1,000 could not be re-exported to SenseTime if it contained more than 
$250 worth of controlled U.S. components.
The second category is so-called foreign-produced direct products—items that may not 
actually contain any controlled U.S. tech but were nonetheless designed or manufactured 
with the assistance of such tech. 44 T raditionally, this rule covered only those foreign prod-
ucts deriving from a particular subset of controlled U.S. technologies: those placed on the 
CCL for “national security” reasons (as opposed to “anti-terrorism,” “regional stability,” and 
other rationales).45 But in 2020, the T rump 
administration created a harsher version of 
the rule for select companies on the Entity 
List—namely, Huawei and more than 150 
of its affiliates. 46 These companies, desig -
nated with “footnote 1,” need permission 
from the Commerce Department to import 
foreign semiconductor designs and finished 
chips (among other items) based partly on 
U.S. technology.47 Because the United States “maintains a significant leadership position in 
[semiconductor design] software and in some segments of semiconductor manufacturing 
tools,” this amounts to a broad-based ban. 48 Licenses are available: the T rump and Biden 
administrations have both allowed Huawei to continue receiving billions of dollars of less-
sensitive U.S.- and foreign-origin semiconductors and other goods. 49 However, any chips 
destined for use in Huawei’s 5G systems are presumptively denied.50
U.S. controls are not only concerned with exports to foreign countries; they also restrict 
so-called deemed exports to foreign citizens, even those lawfully living and working in the 
United States. This rule means that some U.S. firms—including many in the semiconduc-
tor and telecommunications sectors—must apply for a license to employ foreign workers 
in certain technical roles, depending on their nationality and the controlled technology at 
issue.51 Prior to 2020, foreigners without military affiliations were exempt from this require-
ment; however, the T rump administration eliminated this exemption.52 China has been by 
far the biggest supplier of foreign workers subject to deemed export rules: it accounted for 
44 percent of approved deemed exports between 2015 and 2019.53
The Trump administration 
created a harsher version of the 
foreign-produced direct product 
rule for Huawei and more than 
150 of its affiliates.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
JON BATEMAN 21 
INVESTMENT RESTRICTIONS
U.S. national security agencies can impose restrictions on inbound investments (foreign -
ers investing in U.S. companies) as well as outbound investments (Americans investing in 
foreign companies).54 For inbound investments, the primary regulatory mechanism is the 
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) , an interagency body 
chaired by the treasury secretary. CFIUS—or in rare cases, the president—can block trans-
actions that “[threaten] to impair the national security of the United States.” 55 In general, 
CFIUS can review only those transactions where a foreigner would acquire dominant con-
trol over a business with U.S. operations. However, the Foreign Investment Risk Review 
Modernization Act (FIRRMA) of 2018 broadened CFIUS’s jurisdiction over transactions 
involving “critical technology,” “critical infrastructure,” or “sensitive personal data.”56 
For these, CFIUS can block even noncontrolling stakes that would nevertheless entitle for-
eign investors to access key information or influence corporate decisionmaking.57 FIRRMA, 
like ECRA, was principally intended to limit China’s access to U.S. technology.58
CFIUS has become more active in recent years as Washington has grown increasingly con-
cerned with the national security risks of foreign investment and Congress has provided the 
body with new resources and authorities. Since 2017, more companies have had to notify 
CFIUS of covered transactions and to submit to CFIUS investigations; many have ulti -
mately backed out of business deals amid CFIUS scrutiny. 59 CFIUS has blocked Chinese 
acquirers from buying several U.S. tech companies, including Grindr (a dating app) and 
PatientsLikeMe (a healthcare social network) in 2019 and Stayntouch (a hotel management 
platform) in 2020.60 A CFIUS investigation also preceded T rump’s 2020 executive order re-
quiring ByteDance to sell TikT ok.61 CFIUS also stopped Ant Financial, a fintech affiliate of 
Alibaba, from buying MoneyGram in 2018.62 Meanwhile, Chinese investors have become 
less interested in transactions that involve notifying CFIUS (see Figure 2). They submitted 
just seventeen notices (9 percent of the global total) in 2020, down from sixty (25 percent) 
in 2017.63 Heightened CFIUS scrutiny is probably one of multiple factors at play; Chinese 
foreign direct investment in the United States fell across the board during this period.64
There is no body like CFIUS that systemically reviews Americans’ outbound investments 
for national security risks—though Congress and the Biden administration are actively 
exploring the idea.65 For now, outbound investments are subject to a few, narrowly defined 
restrictions. A 2021 executive order by Biden prohibits Americans from trading securi -
ties of any company designated by the Department of the T reasury as operating in “the 
defense and related materiel sector or the surveillance technology sector of the economy 
of the PRC [People’s Republic of China].”66 This Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial 
Complex Companies List—so named to differentiate it from the T reasury Department’s 
Specially Designated Nationals list, described later—currently cites sixty-eight Chinese 
companies, including tech firms like Huawei, Hikvision, SenseTime, DJI, Megvii, SMIC,

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
22 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
China T elecom, China Unicom, and China Mobile.67 It replaced a very similar list, created 
by the T rump administration, that was maintained by the Department of Defense (DOD) 
and did not cover surveillance technology.68
While outbound investment limits are currently narrow, pending regulations of U.S. stock 
exchanges may further diminish Americans’ practical opportunities to invest in Chinese 
tech firms (and other Chinese companies). The Holding Foreign Companies Accountable 
Act, passed in December 2020, takes aim at publicly traded companies whose financial 
statements cannot be adequately inspected or investigated by U.S. authorities due to for -
eign government obstruction.69 China has long hindered U.S. accounting oversight; in fact, 
it is the only country currently classified as doing so by the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board, a congressionally chartered nonprofit. 70 The new law essentially gives 
China three years to come into compliance with U.S. accounting transparency standards. If 
it fails to do so, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) must order the de-listing 
of Chinese companies from U.S. stock exchanges and bar other ways of trading their secu-
rities, like over-the-counter sales. There are currently about 225 U.S.-listed Chinese com -
panies, including tech giants such as Alibaba, JD.com, Baidu, and Weibo, plus a smaller 
Figure 2: Chinese Acquirers Are Submitting Fewer CFIUS Notices
Sources: “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2020,” CFIUS, July 2021, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/system/files/206/
CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2020.pdf; and “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2019,” CFIUS, July 2020, https:/ /
home.treasury.gov/system/files/206/CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2019.pdf.
Non-Chinese acquirers
Chinese acquirers
CFIUS TRANSACTION NOTICES
FIGURE 2
Chinese Acquirers Are Submitting Fewer CFIUS Notices
SOURCE: “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2020,” CFIUS, July 2021, https:/ /home.treasury.gov/system/ﬁles/206/
CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2020.pdf; and “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2019,” CFIUS, July 2020, 
https:/ /home.treasury.gov/system/ﬁles/206/CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2019.pdf.
2018 2019 2020 2021
0
50
100
150
200
250
177
60 55
25 17
174 206
170

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
JON BATEMAN 23 
number of firms traded over-the-counter, like T encent and Kingsoft.71 SEC Chairman Gary 
Gensler recently warned that “the clock is ticking.” 72 In fact, bills to accelerate the de-
listing timeline by one year have already passed the Senate and been endorsed by House 
leadership.73
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSING AND 
EQUIPMENT AUTHORIZATIONS
Federal law gives the U.S. government several tools to restrict foreign involvement in do -
mestic telecommunications. Any international carrier wishing to operate in the United 
States must first receive a “public interest” certificate from the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC).74 In weighing the public interest, the FCC considers factors such as 
“national security, law enforcement, foreign policy, or trade policy concerns related to the 
applicant’s or authorization holder’s reportable foreign ownership.”75 Submarine cable land-
ings likewise require an FCC license, which can be denied in order to “promote the security 
of the United States.”76
Although the FCC is an independent agency overseen by Congress, it “has sought the 
expertise of the relevant Executive Branch agencies for over 20 years, and has accord -
ed deference to their expertise when they have identified . . . a concern in a particular 
application.”77 National security agencies convey their views on FCC licensing decisions 
through a forum known as T eam T elecom, now formally called the Committee for the 
Assessment of Foreign Participation in 
the United States T elecommunications 
Services Sector , chaired by the attorney 
general.78 T eam T elecom’s roles, responsi-
bilities, and procedures were formalized in 
2020, reflecting how national security has 
become increasingly central to FCC licens-
ing decisions.
Since 2019, T eam T elecom has successfully spurred the FCC to crack down on Chinese enti-
ties seen as “vulnerable to exploitation, influence, and control by the Chinese government.”79 
The FCC has cited these concerns to deny China Mobile’s application for a carrier license 
and to revoke the licenses of China T elecom, China Unicom, and the Chinese firms Pacific 
Networks and ComNet.80 T eam T elecom also recommended that the FCC deny permission 
for Pacific Light Cable Network System, a Chinese company, to lay an undersea cable be -
tween Hong Kong and the United States in partnership with Google and Facebook.81 The 
application was then withdrawn, as was another application for a U.S.–Hong Kong cable 
to be built by Facebook, Amazon, and China Mobile.82
Team Telecom’s formalization 
reflects how national security has 
become increasingly central to FCC 
licensing decisions, particularly 
those involving China.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
24 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Beyond telecommunications, the FCC also regulates radio frequency devices—an enor -
mous category that includes “almost all electronic-electrical products” sold to businesses 
and consumers.83 Radio frequency devices must receive an equipment authorization, or 
qualify for an exemption, to be imported or marketed in the United States, and such deci-
sions have long been based on technical criteria alone. 84 In June 2021, however, the FCC 
unanimously voted to invite public comment on a proposal to incorporate national security 
considerations.85 It cited statutory and regulatory provisions allowing the commission to 
consider “the public interest” in making authorization decisions.86
The FCC proposed to deny authorizations 
and exemptions—and potentially revoke 
existing approvals—for equipment made 
by companies on its Covered List . This 
list, created by the Secure and Trusted 
Communications Networks Act of 2019, 
initially contained just five companies (all 
Chinese): Huawei, ZTE, Hytera, Hikvision, and Dahua. 87 Congress mandated the inclu -
sion of these companies, plus any other entity that the executive branch later determines 
“poses unacceptable risk to the national security of the United States or the security and 
safety of United States persons.”88 The FCC’s pending equipment authorization rules will 
lead to a virtual ban on new electronics made by Covered List companies. Although formal 
rulemaking is still underway, Biden in November signed the Secure Equipment Act, which 
compels the FCC to adopt the core of its proposed rule and thus renders public comments 
somewhat irrelevant.89 
In March 2022, the FCC expanded the Covered List beyond the original five companies 
mandated by Congress. It added China Mobile, China T elecom, and Kaspersky Lab (a 
Russian cybersecurity firm). 90 Kaspersky, the only non-Chinese company on the list, was 
most likely targeted due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. It is also the first software company 
to be listed, indicating the Covered List has broadened in scope and could come to include 
Chinese software companies as well. The FCC has promised that it will continue to list 
more companies as needed. One FCC commissioner has already proposed adding DJI, call-
ing it “Huawei on wings.”91 Such a move could force DJI—by far the dominant drone-seller 
in the United States and globally—to exit the U.S. market.
VISA RESTRICTIONS
The U.S. government has the discretion to bar noncitizens from entering the country if 
they are deemed to be national security threats. It can do so for specific individuals or 
entire classes of people. One mechanism is Section 212(a)(3)(C) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act (INA), which allows the secretary of state to exclude any noncitizen whose 
Pending national security rules 
will lead to a virtual U.S. ban on 
new electronics made by certain 
companies—almost all Chinese.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
JON BATEMAN 25 
presence “would have potentially serious adverse foreign policy consequences for the United 
States.”92 The State Department cited this provision in 2020 to deny entry for “certain 
employees of Chinese technology companies,” including Huawei, “that provide material 
support to regimes engaging in human rights abuses globally.”93
Another powerful tool is the INA’s Section 212(f ), which can be used to ban broad cat -
egories of foreigners. It allows presidents to exclude “all aliens or any class of aliens” whose 
entry “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States.” 94 Every president since 
Ronald Reagan has used this authority at least once; Donald T rump used it particularly of-
ten.95 In May 2020, T rump suspended entry of all foreign graduate students and researchers 
with past or present ties to “an entity in the PRC that implements or supports the PRC’s 
‘military-civil fusion strategy.’”96 This policy, which Biden retained, has so far led to the re-
vocation of more than 1,000 visas and the denial of at least 700 to 1,300 visa applications.97 
Georgetown’s Center for Security and Emerging T echnology estimated that 3,000 to 5,000 
Chinese students and researchers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM) could be excluded annually.98
Other policy tools can be used to limit foreigners’ opportunities to visit, study, and work in 
the United States without banning their entry outright.99 For example, the T rump admin-
istration proposed new regulations to shorten the length of F-1 (student) visas100 and to 
increase the minimum wages that employers would need to pay H1-B (specialty occupa-
tion) visa holders.101 T rump also signed an executive order temporarily suspending issu -
ance of new H1-B visas to applicants outside of the United States during the COVID-19 
pandemic.102 While none of these moves specifically targeted China, Chinese students and 
workers were among the largest groups affected. 103 (Biden later suspended or rescinded 
these policies.104) T rump also restricted Chinese Communist Party members and their fami-
lies to single-entry visas valid for one month, whereas other Chinese people can obtain 
multiple-entry visas lasting up to ten years; Biden has kept this policy.105
IMPORT RESTRICTIONS
U.S. domestic law authorizes tariffs, duties, taxes, quotas, exclusions, and other import 
restrictions under certain circumstances. The lead agency is the Commerce Department, 
which investigates unfair foreign practices alleged by U.S. industry (or more rarely, launches 
self-initiated probes) and can impose import restrictions as a remedy.106 If Commerce finds 
that imported goods are being sold “at less than [their] fair value,” then it can impose an-
tidumping duties to negate the predatory price cuts. 107 If the imported goods have been 
subsidized by a foreign government, then the department can levy countervailing duties 
equal to the value of the subsidies.108 China has long been a top target of both antidumping 
and countervailing duties, though typically on raw materials and other commodities (not 
finished technology products).109

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
26 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Antidumping and countervailing duties require the consent of the U.S. International T rade 
Commission (USITC)—an independent, nonpartisan, quasi-judicial body.110 The USITC 
must find that “an [existing] industry in the United States is materially injured, or is threat-
ened with material injury” by the wrongful dumping or subsidy, or that “the [future] es -
tablishment of an industry in the United States is materially retarded.”111 The USITC also 
has its own separate authority, under Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930, to investigate 
“unfair methods of competition and unfair acts” by foreign entities. 112 Section 337 inves -
tigations tend to focus on intellectual property violations, the main problems singled out 
in the statutory text. If a foreign product is shown to violate a U.S. patent, copyright, 
trademark, or other intellectual property protection, then the USITC can ban its importa-
tion or sale. Since 2018, the USITC has blocked the importation of some two-way radios 
made by Hytera because they violated Motorola’s patents.113 Hytera had apparently poached 
employees from Motorola and directed them to steal large amounts of design data before 
leaving their former company. (The Justice Department later indicted Hytera for conspiracy 
to commit trade secret theft.114) In 2020, the USITC ordered the exclusion of several popu-
lar DJI drone models that it found had infringed a U.S. patent held by Autel Robotics 
USA, the American subsidiary of a Chinese company. 115 However, the order was paused 
and eventually rescinded after DJI and Autel reached a settlement in related litigation.116
Antidumping duties and countervailing 
duties have a long, bipartisan pedigree and 
are specifically sanctioned by the World 
T rade Organization (WTO). 117 (Section 
337 is less commonly employed and has 
garnered occasional complaints from U.S. 
trading partners.118) But the T rump admin-
istration sought even more powerful trade 
weapons.119 It therefore dusted off several 
controversial statutes that had fallen into disuse during the WTO era. 120 One of these was 
Section 301 of the T rade Act of 1974, which enables the U.S. T rade Representative (USTR) 
to investigate trade agreement violations or any other foreign “act, policy, or practice” that 
“burdens or restricts United States commerce” and is “unjustifiable,” “unreasonable,” or 
“discriminatory.”121 If it finds fault, USTR has broad discretion to institute retaliatory mea-
sures against the offending country. These measures—unlike antidumping and counter -
vailing duties or Section 337 exclusions—can target “any goods or economic sector . . . 
without regard to whether or not [they] were involved in the act, policy, or practice” being 
investigated.122
In 2017, T rump ordered USTR to launch a Section 301 investigation into Chinese prac -
tices “that may be harming American intellectual property rights, innovation, or technology 
development.”123 USTR found China responsible for numerous unfair practices, includ -
ing forced technology transfer, discriminatory licensing, strategic foreign investments, and 
USTR imposed tariffs on most 
imports from China in response 
to Beijing’s forced tech transfer, 
discriminatory licensing, strategic 
foreign investments, and 
cyber-enabled IP theft.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
JON BATEMAN 27 
cyber-enabled intellectual property theft.124 Based on these findings, USTR eventually im-
posed tariffs of 10 percent to 25 percent on the majority of U.S. imports from China. 125 
Affected goods include some finished tech products (such as certain monitors and touch 
screens, industrial robots, and specialized cameras) and technology components (like inte -
grated circuits, batteries, cooling fans, and disk drives), but not other major categories like 
cell phones, laptops, or video game consoles. 126 This was only the second time since 2001 
that a new Section 301 investigation had led to unilateral U.S. trade restrictions.127 The tar-
iffs remain largely intact today, though the Biden administration is now considering narrow 
carve-outs for products only available from China.128
T rump also resurrected another moribund authority, Section 232(b) of the T rade Expansion 
Act of 1962, which had not been used since 2001.129 This provision enables the Commerce 
Department to investigate whether “an article is being imported into the United States in 
such quantities or under such circumstances as to threaten to impair the national security.”130 
If a national security threat exists, Commerce can remedy the threat by “tak[ing] action to 
adjust imports.” (There need not be any finding of unfair foreign practices.) Notably, the 
statute “recognize[s] the close relation of the economic welfare of the Nation to our national 
security,” opening the door for economically motivated import restrictions. 131 In 2017, 
T rump ordered the department to self-initiate Section 232(b) investigations of steel and 
aluminum.132 The investigations led to new steel and aluminum tariffs on China and several 
other countries.133 So far, Section 232(b) has not been used to target Chinese technology.
In addition to these economic- and national security–oriented statutes, U.S. law has long 
prohibited the import of goods made with forced labor.134 Since 2018, Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP) has steadily ramped up enforcement against Chinese-origin items made 
by Uyghur detainees. 135 CBP has issued several Withhold Release Orders to ban com -
puter parts, silica-based products used in solar panels and electronics, and various non-tech 
goods from specified companies operating in Xinjiang. 136 Dissatisfied with this piecemeal 
approach, Congress passed the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, which Biden signed 
in December 2021. It creates a rebuttable presumption that all Xinjiang-made goods are 
products of forced labor and therefore cannot be imported.137
FINANCIAL SANCTIONS
Dozens of U.S. government programs authorize financial sanctions on foreign individu -
als and entities.138 Congress created some of these programs, but most were fashioned by 
presidents using the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA).139 IEEPA 
allows the president to declare a “national emergency” regarding “any unusual and extraor-
dinary [foreign] threat . . . to the national security, foreign policy, or economy of the United 
States.”140 The president may then “deal with” the threat by blocking some or all financial 
activities of designated actors—for example, freezing their assets and barring them from

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
28 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
receiving any money or property. 141 Presidents have declared seventy-four national emer -
gencies since 1979, with forty still in effect.142 (Emergencies must be renewed annually and 
comply with other procedural requirements in the National Emergencies Act.143)
After a sanctions program has been established, the power to designate specific actors is 
typically delegated to the T reasury Department. Those subject to the harshest sanctions 
are placed on T reasury’s Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List .144 A review of this 
list shows that China has been sparingly targeted by U.S. financial sanctions to date (see 
Figure 3). The SDN List includes 332 China-based actors, about 3 percent of the glob -
al total (9,792). 145 Moreover, these China-based actors were generally not sanctioned for 
China-specific reasons, such as involvement with Beijing’s domestic human rights abuses.146 
Rather, most were punished for their dealings with North Korea, Iran, and other sanc -
tioned nations. For example, the Chinese state-owned enterprise CEIEC (China National 
Electronics Import & Export Corporation) was designated in 2020 for helping undermine 
democracy in Venezuela by “supporting the Maduro regime’s malicious cyber efforts” and 
providing “a commercialized version of China’s ‘Great Firewall.’”147
Figure 3: The SDN List Rarely Targets China or Cites 
China-Specific Rationales 
Source: Author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Sanctions List Search and SDN spreadsheet, available at 
https:/ /sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/ and https:/ /home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/specially-
designated-nationals-list-data-formats-data-schemas (primary names), as of March 27, 2022.
Note: Entries with exact duplicate names were excluded, but entries with close variations of names, aliases, sub -
sidiaries, and affiliates were included. “China” here refers to mainland China, Hong Kong, and Macau. China-based 
actors include some third-country entities that maintain a presence in China. China-specific reasons mean human 
rights abuses and corruption (Executive Order 13818) and Hong Kong repression (Executive Order 13936).
China-based 
actors
FIGURE 3
The SDN List Rarely Targets China or Cites China-Speciﬁc Relations
SOURCE: Author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Sanctions List Search and SDN spreadsheet, available at 
https:/ /sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/ and https:/ /home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/ﬁnancial-sanctions/specially-
designated-nationals-list-data-formats-data-schemas (primary names), as of January 30, 2022.
Sanctioned for ties 
to third countries
Sanctioned for 
China-speciﬁc reasons
Non-China-based 
actors 
9.460 332 273
59

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
JON BATEMAN 29 
T wo relatively new sanctions programs have been used to target Chinese government of -
ficials and entities for their domestic abuses, suggesting that China could become a more 
explicit focus of U.S. financial sanctions over time. In 2017, T rump declared that “serious 
human rights abuse and corruption around the world” constituted a national emergency, 
invoking IEEPA and the Global Magnitsky Act .148 Seventeen Chinese individuals and 
organizations have been designated under this authority (mostly for activities in Xinjiang), 
and many more could be targeted in the future—including people or companies that pro -
vide “technological support” to Chinese human rights abuses. 149 (The Uyghur Human 
Rights Policy Act of 2020 and the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act of 2021 call 
for additional Xinjiang-related sanctions to be imposed. 150) T rump created another new 
authority in 2020 to punish the suppression of Hong Kong’s autonomy, democracy, and 
human rights, including online censorship; forty-two local and national Chinese officials 
have since been designated on that basis.151
The draft U.S. Innovation and Competition Act , recently passed by the Senate, further 
suggests the likelihood of additional financial sanctions targeting China and its technology 
ecosystem. Identifying “sanctions and other restrictions” as “[central] to strategic competi-
tion with China,” the bill criticizes the executive branch for not sufficiently utilizing the 
“broad range of tough authorities” provided by Congress. 152 It demands SDN List desig -
nation and/or other harsh sanctions for foreign actors found to be supporting trade se -
cret theft or Chinese government efforts to “undermin[e] cybersecurity.”153 The equivalent 
House bill, the America COMPETES Act, contains no similar provisions.154
TECHNOLOGY TRANSACTION RULES
The breadth and flexibility of executive powers can permit U.S. administrations to apply 
existing authorities in novel ways, sometimes spinning up whole new regulatory regimes 
without the need for further legislation. The T rump administration did this on several oc-
casions. Leveraging IEEPA’s power to restrict “transactions,” T rump debuted new kinds of 
restrictions that operated differently from the SDN List—including what is now called 
the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List. This tool, described 
earlier, allows the U.S. government to ban outbound investments in certain Chinese firms 
while stopping short of a full asset freeze.
One of T rump’s most high-profile inno -
vations was his attempted “app bans” of 
TikT ok and WeChat.155 T o impose these 
bans, T rump declared that “the unrestrict-
ed acquisition or use in the United States 
of information and communications tech-
nology or services” (ICTS) associated with 
The breadth and flexibility of 
executive powers can permit U.S. 
administrations to spin up whole 
new regulatory regimes without the 
need for further legislation.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
30 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
“foreign adversaries” constituted a national 
emergency.156 His Commerce Department 
then issued rules to block app stores, host -
ing services, content delivery networks, 
and peering services from supporting these 
two apps—effectively banning them in the 
United States.157 T rump later sought to ban 
AliPay, T encent QQ, and six other Chinese 
apps as well.158 But no app ban was ever enforced. Federal courts enjoined the TikT ok and 
WeChat bans; T rump left office before detailed rules on the others could be published; and 
Biden wiped the slate clean.159
Mobile apps were not the only targets of T rump’s novel technology restrictions. Relying on 
the same ICTS national emergency, he ordered U.S. bulk power systems, which are key el-
ements of the electrical grid, to curb the use of equipment sourced from “foreign adversary” 
countries such as China. 160 Specifically, the Department of Energy barred Chinese equip -
ment from being used in bulk power systems that serve military facilities “critical to the 
defense of the United States.” 161 Biden paused implementation of this rule pending a 
review.162
More recently, the U.S. government has sought to replace such ad hoc restrictions with 
formalized regulatory structures. In March 2021, Biden allowed a major new regulation de-
veloped by the T rump administration to come into force. The ICTS supply chain security 
rule cites, once again, the national emergency regarding foreign adversary ICTS. 163 It es-
tablishes a CFIUS-like mechanism for federal government review of almost any large-scale 
use of Chinese ICTS in the United States. The Department of Commerce can block such 
transactions if they pose “undue or unacceptable risks.”
Biden later issued an executive order outlining “a criteria-based decision framework and 
rigorous, evidence-based analysis” to help guide the rule’s application to internet-con -
nected software. 164 He told the Commerce Department to examine any links to adver -
sarial military, intelligence, proliferation, or cyber activities, and to consider the quality 
of third-party auditing, the scope and sensitivity of data collected, the number and sen -
sitivity of users, and any verifiable risk remediation measures, among other factors. The 
department has not yet taken any public enforcement action under the new authority, 
but multiple investigations are apparently under way. Commerce has issued subpoenas 
to unnamed Chinese companies, is reportedly investigating Alibaba’s cloud business and 
DiDi, and is probably also reviewing at least some of the mobile apps that T rump sought 
to ban by executive order. 165
The ICTS supply chain security 
rule establishes a CFIUS-like 
mechanism for federal government 
review of almost any large-scale use 
of Chinese ICTS in the United States.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
JON BATEMAN 31 
FEDERAL USE AND SPENDING RESTRICTIONS
The federal government has increasingly acted to limit its own use of and financial support 
for certain Chinese technologies, although these actions are not a primary focus of this 
report. These efforts can have wider impacts due to the U.S. government’s large purchas -
ing power. Drones, for example, have been the target of several recent federal restrictions. 
The Defense Department suspended its purchase of all commercial drones in 2018 due to 
concerns about the security of Chinese products, and the next year, Congress permanently 
barred DOD from using any drones with Chinese components. 166 After the Department 
of the Interior grounded its entire drone fleet for similar reasons, T rump sought to institute 
government-wide restrictions on foreign drones.167 Days before leaving office, he signed an 
executive order telling agencies not to buy drones whose key hardware, software, or data 
services come from “adversary countries” like China.168
T elecommunications and video surveillance equipment have also been subjects of recent 
China-related procurement restrictions. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2019 included a provision— Section 889—prohibiting agencies from spending any 
federal funds on such equipment made by Huawei, ZTE, Hytera, Hikvision, and Dahua.169 
This government-wide blacklist may expand in the future; the law allows DOD to add 
other firms “connected to” the Chinese government. (Any additions would automatically 
be placed on the FCC’s Covered List as well.170)
As the U.S. government curbs its own direct purchase or use of Chinese technology, it has 
also imposed parallel restrictions on federal contractors and grantees, a much bigger uni -
verse. Section 889, which blacklists certain Chinese equipment within the federal govern -
ment, separately bars agencies from contracting with entities that “use” such equipment—
even if their “use” has no connection to the federal contract and involves an unrelated unit 
of the contractor’s business.171 More than 16,000 companies had federal prime contracts as 
of 2018, suggesting the wide reach of Section 889.172 Similarly, the FCC has leveraged fed-
eral subsidies to discourage the private use of Chinese telecommunications equipment. It 
will subsidize carriers’ efforts to “remove and replace” Huawei and ZTE equipment, while 
denying future subsidies for carriers who retain such equipment. 173 Although technically 
voluntary, this program operates as a de facto ban on Huawei and ZTE usage in the tele -
coms sector. Small and rural carriers cannot afford to lose federal funds, while large carriers 
already generally avoid Huawei and ZTE.174
LAW ENFORCEMENT
Outside the regulatory domain, federal law enforcement activities can also have the effect 
of restricting China’s illicit (and licit) access to U.S. technology. From November 2018 to 
February 2022, the China Initiative was the Department of Justice’s strategic campaign

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
32 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
to investigate and prosecute theft of trade secrets, espionage, foreign influence activities, 
supply chain subversion, and other threats from China. The Justice Department publicly 
categorized at least seventy-seven criminal cases against more than 150 defendants as part 
of the China Initiative, according to a database compiled by the MIT T echnology Review.175 
However, the Justice Department had no official definition of a China Initiative case, and 
many of these cases would presumably still have been filed even without such an initiative.
The most high-profile indictments charged Huawei and its chief financial officer, Meng 
Wanzhou, with theft of trade secrets and fraud.176 Cases against other Chinese, American, 
and third-country nationals and companies alleged export control violations, hacking, eco-
nomic and national security espionage, and failure to register as a foreign agent. 177 Many 
cases did not have an explicit connection to the Chinese government.178
The most controversial and arguably significant element of the China Initiative was the 
Justice Department’s crackdown on what it called “nontraditional collectors” at U.S. uni-
versities. Fearing illicit transfer of technology and intellectual property, federal prosecutors 
charged about twenty U.S.-based Chinese and American researchers with hiding their ties 
to the Chinese government.179 For example, multiple cases alleged that researchers applied 
for federal grants without disclosing their participation in Beijing’s Thousand Talents Plan.
The crackdown led many Chinese researchers to leave the United States and made American 
academics more reluctant to collaborate with Chinese counterparts. 180 Critics called this a 
harmful chilling effect, but Justice Department officials (even well into the Biden admin -
istration) characterized it as successful deterrence. 181 Over time, some of the cases proved 
weak. Since 2021, the department has dropped charges against five Chinese researchers, 
dismissed its case against a China-born American academic, and failed to convict a Chinese 
Canadian professor.182 It also secured some victories, such as the conviction of a high-profile 
American chemistry professor for hiding his ties to China.183
After a monthslong review, the Biden administration announced an end to the China 
Initiative in February 2022. 184 The change was partly cosmetic: the Justice Department’s 
China-related work largely continues under different branding. Matt Olsen, assistant at -
torney general for national security, explained that the China Initiative label “helped give 
rise to a harmful perception that the department applies a lower standard to investigate and 
prosecute criminal conduct related to that country or that we in some way view people with 
racial, ethnic or familial ties to China differently.” Although Olsen disputed this perception, 
he nevertheless announced one key policy change. “Cases involving academic integrity and 
research security” (formerly described by the more charged term “nontraditional collec -
tion”) are now mainly handled as administrative matters by the federal agencies that fund 
research. Prosecutions of such cases will be rarer and require closer scrutiny from senior 
department officials.185

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
JON BATEMAN 33 
Table 4: Select Chinese Tech Companies Subject to Multiple U.S. Restrictions
Huawei ZTE Hikvision Hytera Alibaba T encent Dahua China 
T elecom
China 
Mobile DJI ByteDance Kingsoft SenseTime Megvii SMIC China 
Unicom
Fujian 
Jinhua
Non-SDN CMIC List X X X X X X X X X
Entity List X X X X X X X X
Covered List X X X X X X X
Section 889 blacklist X X X X X
Federal indictment X X X X
App ban
ICTS supply chain 
security review X ? ? ?
FCC license denial/
revocation X X X
CFIUS action X † X
Stock exchange 
de-listing/over-the-
counter ban
† † †
Remove and 
replace rule X X
Section 337 X
Foreign-produced 
direct product 
footnote 1
X
Employee visa ban X
LEGEND 
X = active ? = probable † = pending * = rescinded
Note: This table covers actions taken between January 1, 2017, and March 27, 2022. Alibaba here includes Ant Group, a closely related company.
Sources: U.S. government documents and press reports cited throughout this chapter.
*
* *
*
*

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
34 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. STRATEGY
This overview of U.S. policy tools holds at least two important lessons for American strate-
gists weighing the larger issues at stake in technological decoupling. First, Washington’s 
restrictive powers are dizzyingly complex to administer, with authority fragmented across 
multiple agencies, statutes, and policy areas. It is therefore essential to articulate a govern -
ment-wide strategy that can align these disparate elements into a coherent whole. Without 
such a strategy, different policy levers may operate out of sync, or even work at cross-pur -
poses, based on agencies’ divergent views of key goals and trade-offs.
Second, U.S. law gives the executive branch vast discretion to pursue a technological de -
coupling of its choosing. By interpreting pliable concepts like “national security” or “the 
public interest,” U.S. officials can unlock an extraordinary range of powers to restrict the 
technology products, services, and inputs flowing between America and China. Most of 
these powers have only been used to a tiny fraction of their full potential. And Congress has 
been an eager partner—providing several new authorities and prodding administrations to 
act. Legally speaking, U.S. officials have a blank canvas on which to paint new restrictive 
measures and effect technological decoupling.186 This is both an opportunity and a danger, 
as overreach becomes more likely in such circumstances.
All of the policy tools defined and explained above will be collectively referred to as “tech -
nology restrictions,” “technology controls,” or “defensive measures.” The remainder of this 
report explores which technologies Washington should target with this general tool kit to 
reduce U.S.-China technological interdependence. Identifying the best tool or tools to use 
with each technology area is a topic for another paper.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
35 
CHOOSING A STRATEGY
The dozens of new U.S. government technology controls aimed at China in recent years did 
not all have a single, unified objective. Some sought to counter national security threats, 
some were more economically motivated, and some had ancillary purposes (like domestic 
or diplomatic gamesmanship) unrelated to technology itself. Yet in public discourse, and 
even in policy circles, distinct objectives are often left undifferentiated or undefined. T oo 
frequently, U.S. leaders and analysts speak of “countering” or “reining in” Chinese technol-
ogy threats and risks—highly general formulations that elide key goals and trade-offs.
Untangling this jumble of U.S. objectives is an important first step in developing a coherent 
strategy. Table 5 describes nine apparent rationales for recent U.S. technology restrictions 
aimed at China.
The existence of so many distinct policy rationales is not surprising. The United States has 
many different concerns with China, and technology plays a significant part in nearly all 
of them. T echnology is rightly at the heart of America’s China policies. (The corollary idea, 
that China should be at the heart of U.S. tech policy, is more debatable.) In many cases, 
these policy rationales overlap and reinforce each other. For example, potential Chinese 
influence over U.S. telecommunications networks raises multiple fears simultaneously: 
theft of commercial secrets, tracking of U.S. government officials, injection of disinforma-
tion, or subversion of critical infrastructure in a crisis, among other possibilities. Hence 
the U.S. telecommunications sector was an early target for American restrictive measures, 
and the global telecoms marketplace remains a central preoccupation of Washington’s tech 
diplomacy.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
36 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Table 5: Untangling the Many U.S. Rationales for China-Related 
Tech Restrictions
U.S. 
interest area Rationale Illustrative policy
National 
security
Maintaining a military 
edge over China
Since 2020, Chinese graduate students and researchers with institutional ties to 
Beijing’s “military-civil fusion” efforts have been denied visas.
Limiting Chinese 
national security 
espionage
In 2019, a Chinese company was forced to sell the dating app Grindr because the 
app’s sensitive personal data could be used for intelligence targeting.
Preventing Chinese 
sabotage in a crisis
Since 2019, U.S. telecommunications providers have been unable to receive federal 
subsidies to buy Huawei or ZTE equipment, partly due to sabotage fears.
Limiting Chinese influ-
ence operations
In 2020, Trump ordered a ban on TikTok in part because the app could “be used for 
disinformation campaigns that benefit the Chinese Communist Party.”
Denying support for 
Chinese and China-en-
abled authoritarianism 
and repression
In 2019, Chinese tech companies, including Hikvision, Megvii, and SenseTime, 
were placed on the Entity List due to their involvement in Beijing’s repression 
in Xinjiang.
Economic
Countering unfair 
Chinese economic 
practices and IP theft
The Trump administration’s broad-based tariffs on China—aimed at countering 
unfair economic practices such as intellectual property theft—applied to many 
technology goods, including smart devices, flash memory devices, and electronic 
components.
Competing and leading 
in strategic industries
U.S. controls on the export of American technologies to Huawei are especially 
strict for semiconductors and for any tech that would be used “with or in any 5G 
devices”—two areas considered strategic by Washington.
Ancillary
Obtaining general 
leverage over China
Trump described U.S. and allied actions against ZTE and Huawei as leverage in 
broader trade talks. In the Phase One deal, he used this leverage to gain 
concessions in non-tech areas like agriculture and financial services.
Shaping U.S. domestic 
narratives
Shortly before the 2020 election, the Trump administration released new H1-B 
visa restrictions that would have significantly affected Chinese high-tech workers.
THE NEED FOR BETTER STRATEGY
However, a long list of policy aims is not the same as a strategy. In fact, it can be anathema 
to one. Many of these goals are vague and have no clear limiting principle. They can also 
come into conflict with each other, or with other U.S. national priorities. A good strategy 
would clarify key objectives and prioritize them. It would also proffer a theory of success—a 
realistic basis for determining which forms of technological decoupling will actually achieve 
U.S. aims. So far, Washington has struggled to articulate such a strategy.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
JON BATEMAN 37 
Without more strategic clarity, decou -
pling can become overaggressive or inco -
herent and contrary to U.S. interests. For 
example, the U.S. military does not need 
(and cannot achieve) unlimited advan -
tages over China’s military in every place, 
time, and domain. The United States 
must define its desired “military edge” 
over China in more specific terms. Likewise, if Washington seeks to rebalance the terms 
of bilateral economic competition, it should have a desired model of the global economy 
in mind. Are U.S. policymakers aiming for two largely separate international economic 
systems, or would China remain integrated within a modified global economy? And is 
the point to maximize U.S. prosperity and technology leadership, or to minimize China’s 
(which are not the same thing)?
Without a sense of strategic priorities, decoupling can cause havoc as one objective smash-
es into another. Barring Chinese graduate students helps to reduce illicit technology 
transfer, but it also hampers U.S. technological competitiveness by spurning a key source 
of skilled labor.187 Which goal takes precedence? T echnological decoupling is fraught with 
these kinds of costs and risks—and unfortunately, their ripples can spread far beyond 
the technological realm, affecting seemingly unrelated U.S. goals. For example, harsh 
U.S. measures against Huawei and TikT ok have helped convince many in Beijing that 
Washington seeks wholesale economic containment. In climate change talks, China may 
now be even more liable to view proposed emissions reduction targets as a stealth means 
of stifling its economic growth.
Finally, without a strategic theory of success , decoupling may fail to accomplish much of 
anything good. U.S. efforts to prevent the flow of sensitive technology into China—for 
example, equipment for manufacturing 5- and 7-nanometer node microchips—require co-
operation from many other countries that participate in the supply chain or have access to 
the same sensitive technology. Without this cooperation, technology controls can be futile 
and ultimately self-defeating. Which countries, or multilateral institutions, would belong 
to the U.S. “side” of trusted partners in a given technology area? What mixture of induce -
ment, pressure, and persuasion could succeed in bringing those countries on board and/or 
reshaping multilateral institutions for this purpose? And when are these diplomatic efforts 
really worth the payoff?
THE CURRENT U.S. STRATEGY DEBATE
After the chaos and inconsistency of the T rump years, Biden will need a more rational 
approach—clearly defining U.S. objectives for decoupling and articulating a strategy to 
A long list of policy aims is not 
a strategy. Washington has 
struggled to clarify key objectives, 
prioritize them, and proffer a 
theory of success.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
38 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
achieve them. This is a high stakes challenge. T echnology is a key determinant of American 
national well-being and power, and a central arena of U.S.-China strategic competition. 
It is also fraught with risk and uncertainty. T oo much interdependence with China could 
leave the U.S. economy, society, and national security apparatus vulnerable to espionage or 
subversion, and make America complicit in Chinese technological abuses. Yet too much 
decoupling could impair the U.S. tech ecosystem, further destabilize the bilateral relation -
ship, and alienate U.S. allies and trading partners caught in the crossfire.
There is heated debate about how the United States should thread this needle. T o grossly 
oversimplify, one can define three general camps (see Table 6).188
Restrictionists. First, what might be called a “restrictionist” camp calls for dramatically 
curtailing U.S.-China technology ties. The harshest proposals come from China hawks 
like Matt Pottinger (who has advocated expanding U.S. outbound investment restrictions 
“by at least an order of magnitude”), Derek Scissors (who has recommended far tougher 
export controls and an “outbound version of CFIUS”), and Senator T om Cotton (who has 
proposed a “research blockade” on China, sweeping export controls on high-end semicon-
ductors, secondary sanctions amounting to a “death sentence” for China’s “national cham-
pions,” and revocation of Permanent Normal T rade Relations).189
Some human rights advocates also have restrictionist leanings: twenty-four NGOs includ -
ing Human Rights Watch, Freedom House, and PEN America have called for “ a series of 
escalating actions against technology companies found to be contributing to China’s mass 
surveillance, including by imposing Global Magnitsky sanctions,” while New York Times 
columnist Farhad Manjoo suggested that technological and economic integration with 
China “isn’t worth the moral cost.” 190 And restrictionist sensibilities seem fairly common 
within U.S. national security officialdom, particularly in the military and the Intelligence 
Community (IC). In 2019, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Joseph Dunford 
expressed “great concern” that U.S. tech firms provide “indirect benefit” to the PLA when 
they operate and conduct research in China.191
As these examples indicate, restriction -
ists have varied diagnoses of the problems 
they seek to solve and the appropriate U.S. 
policy response. One common view holds 
that Beijing is successfully executing a long-
term plan to sap American global strength 
and attain regional or even global hege -
mony.192 T echnology is seen as central to 
China’s plans, allowing Beijing to steal U.S. secrets, leapfrog U.S. military capabilities, bol-
ster its own and other countries’ repressive capabilities, and more. Restrictionists therefore 
tend to define bilateral tech ties as zero-sum: China gains long-term strategic advantages 
Restrictionists tend to define 
bilateral tech ties as zero-sum: 
China gains long-term strategic 
advantages while America reaps 
only marginal and transitory gains.

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
JON BATEMAN 39 
by exploiting U.S. tech industries and systems, while America reaps only marginal and 
transitory gains, like paying lower prices for China-derived tech goods. Accordingly, restric-
tionists favor broad-based technological decoupling aimed at denying China meaningful 
opportunities to draw support from, or establish influence within, the U.S. tech ecosystem. 
Hal Brands, for example, has proposed that Washington “work with allies to slow Chinese 
innovation through technological denial policies.” 193 Some restrictionists go beyond mere 
decoupling and argue that U.S. tech controls should be designed to harm and ideally de -
stroy major Chinese tech companies, such as Huawei.
Cooperationists. At the other end of the spectrum, a range of what might called “coop -
erationist” voices have opposed major elements of Washington’s technological decoupling 
agenda. U.S. business interests often tout the economic and technological importance of 
maintaining global supply chains and market access to China. For example, Google warned 
that Huawei’s Entity List designation could create cybersecurity vulnerabilities, and the 
Semiconductor Industry Association has argued that “America’s longstanding leadership 
in semiconductors is put at risk by broad restrictions on U.S. exports of commercial chip 
technologies to China.”194 Meanwhile, some independent technologists and tech activists—
including key pioneers of the early internet—remain vocally committed to techno-globalist 
ideals and view decoupling as anathema. The World Wide Web Foundation (joined by 
Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft, T witter, and others) has warned against “internet fragmen-
tation” and “techno-protectionist initiatives,” while the Internet Society believes that “hav-
ing a government dictate how networks interconnect according to political considerations 
rather than technical considerations, runs contrary to the very idea of the Internet.”195
Cooperationists often posit that a twenty-
first-century system of open technology 
collaboration would reproduce the waves of 
innovation and widely shared global prog-
ress said to characterize the late twentieth 
century. And the United States—with its 
historically dynamic innovation system—
would be well positioned to lead within 
and benefit from such an environment. They also argue that many technology controls are 
simply unworkable, given the practical difficulties of predicting technological change and 
regulating cross-border flows in an already globalized, digitized world.
Another strain of cooperationism exists among progressives, who caution against overinflat-
ing Chinese (and other foreign) threats. Senator Bernie Sanders, for example, has argued 
that “the growing bipartisan push for a confrontation with China” fuels wasteful spending, 
militarism, bigotry, and authoritarian populism at home while reducing the likelihood of 
cooperation on key global issues.196 Applying this critique to U.S. tech policy, Sanders has 
described proposed federal investments in semiconductors as a form of corporate welfare.197 
Cooperationists often posit that 
the United States would be well 
positioned to lead and benefit from a 
twenty-first-century system of open 
technology collaboration.

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
40 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Others have blamed the China Initiative for fomenting xenophobia and racism toward 
U.S.-based academics of Chinese nationality or ethnicity. 198 In addition, some progres -
sives cite climate change as an area where U.S.-China technology cooperation must greatly 
increase, not decrease. More than forty activist groups—including MoveOn, the Sunrise 
Movement, and the Union of Concerned Scientists—have urged the Biden administration 
to “speed the [global] transition away from dirty energy economies” by marrying U.S. clean 
tech with Chinese industrial capacity. 199 (On the other hand, progressive concerns about 
Chinese human right abuses and untrammeled free trade lead some on the left to favor 
more tech restrictions.200)
Centrists. Between the poles of restrictionism and cooperationism lies what might be called 
a “centrist” camp, which seeks to incorporate the best insights of each side while making 
more room for complexity and uncertainty. Centrists agree with restrictionists that Beijing 
poses unique long-term challenges to the United States and that technology is a central risk 
factor. But, echoing cooperationists, they think that some Chinese tech threats are exagger-
ated, offset by the benefits of cooperation, and only partially addressable via China-focused 
governmental restrictions. Centrists generally endorse the overall U.S. shift toward partial 
technological decoupling and accept that decoupling must progress further to protect U.S. 
national security and economic security. However, they want new technology controls to be 
carefully scrutinized; they doubt the viability or wisdom of dividing the world into sealed 
geo-technological blocs. Centrists view Chinese military aggression as a major possibility 
and question Beijing’s willingness to partner on global issues like climate change and pan -
demics. Yet they insist that co-existence and collaboration on urgent challenges must still be 
tried, and so they hope to avoid a technological confrontation that would take bilateral rela-
tions to a breaking point. Some centrists emphasize how much we still do not know about 
China’s long-term path and the ultimate impacts of emerging technologies, and therefore 
recommend hedging strategies to account for multiple possible futures.
A leading centrist statement is the China Strategy Group report co-led by Eric Schmidt and 
Jared Cohen. It argues that “some degree of disentangling is both inevitable and preferable,” 
yet “we [should] seek to avoid unnecessary and counterproductive levels of separation.” 201 
Many other centrists can be found in technocratic bastions such as mainstream Washington 
think tanks and academic policy centers. Stephanie Segal of the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies developed a cost-benefit framework to assess U.S.-China interlink -
ages; she found that “existing [U.S. government restrictions] go a long way in protecting 
national security” and that further decoupling should be “targeted” and rigorously evaluat-
ed.202 Richard Danzig and Lorand Laskai, summarizing a body of research on technological 
decoupling commissioned by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 
advocated “an incremental approach rooted in the indeterminacy of the current moment 
and recognition of the fact that interdependence is likely to continue.” 203 Samm Sacks of 
New America and others have promoted the “small yard, high fence” concept.204 This popu-
lar metaphor, attributed to former U.S. secretary of defense Robert Gates, conveys that

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
JON BATEMAN 41 
technology controls should be the excep -
tion instead of the rule, applying only to 
the most sensitive and strategic areas.205
The centrist approach to technological de -
coupling has been embraced by some mod-
erate political figures as well. Senator Chris 
Coons has also endorsed the “small yard, 
high fence” metaphor and has proposed “safeguard[ing the] crown jewels of technology” 
while “strik[ing] the right balance to avoid [full-scale] decoupling of global tech industries 
between the United States and China.”206 A quiet centrism may also exist at the state and 
local level. The Carnegie report “Making U.S. Foreign Policy Work Better for the Middle 
Class,” published in 2020, drew on interviews of state and local government, business, la -
bor, and community leaders and middle-income workers in Colorado, Nebraska, and Ohio. 
Most interviewees “want[ed] the United States to push back more effectively against unfair 
Chinese trading practices and make investments at home to compete more successfully 
with China. But otherwise they tend[ed] to see China pragmatically and [were] not inclined 
to view the geopolitical rivalry as an organizing principle of U.S. foreign policy.” 207 (More 
recent surveys by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs found that the general American 
public has become “dramatically” more hostile to U.S.-China trade since 2019.208)
Like the other camps, centrists have diverse policy ideas but tend to unite around a few 
general principles. First, centrists say that U.S.-China technological decoupling should 
be selective and targeted. Second, they want decoupling to be coordinated multilaterally. 
Centrists observe that the United States is a leading, but not exclusive or indispensable, 
player for many technologies. This means that unilateral U.S. controls are often ineffective, 
resulting only in self-imposed competitive disadvantages and friction with international 
partners. Therefore, Washington should work with so-called like-minded countries (in par-
ticular, technologically advanced liberal democracies) to create shared policy frameworks.209
Third, centrists insist that “defensive” efforts to curb or thwart Chinese technology threats 
cannot distract from a core “offensive” program to strengthen U.S. and allied technology 
ecosystems. Washington has only so much influence over the course of Chinese techno -
logical advancement, centrists argue, but there is far more the United States can do to im -
prove its own technological strength. Moreover, many of the problems commonly framed 
as Chinese technology threats are partially, or even mostly, the result of domestic American 
challenges. For example, supply chain insecurity (a central focus of China-oriented tech -
nology controls) stems in part from industrial consolidation and workforce shortages in 
the United States; disinformation targeting Americans (a growing concern of China tech 
watchers) is a largely homegrown problem. According to the centrist view, U.S. policy 
should primarily focus on supporting America’s own technology leadership, competitive -
ness, and resilience. Countering China would be a secondary priority.
Centrists have promoted the 
“small yard, high fence” metaphor 
to convey that technology controls 
should apply only to the most 
sensitive and strategic areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
42 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Table 6: Three U.S. Camps Offer Competing Strategies for 
Technological Decoupling
Camp Beliefs Adherents
Restrictionists • U.S.-China tech relationship is zero-sum and tends to 
advantage China
 • U.S. has a short window in which to prevent Chinese 
technological dominance
 • U.S. should greatly expand tech restrictions aimed at China
 • China hawks
 • Some human rights defenders
 • Many national security 
officials
Cooperationists • U.S.-China tech relationship is non-zero-sum and tends to 
benefit the U.S.
 • Americans often inflate China-tech threats
 • Major U.S. tech restrictions are domestically harmful and 
internationally destabilizing
 • Many business interests
 • Techno-globalist activists
 • Some progressives
Centrists • U.S.-China tech relationship has both zero-sum and 
non-zero-sum elements with mixed costs and benefits for 
both countries
 • More U.S. tech controls are needed but these should be 
selective, carefully designed, and multilateral
 • U.S. should focus on nurturing its own technological 
strength and tech policymaking capacity
 • Many mainstream think tank 
analysts
 • Some moderate politicians
 • Some state and local leaders
Implications. This three-camps taxonomy is admittedly crude. Individual people and in -
stitutions do not self-identify with these labels and may not agree with them. Each camp is 
internally diverse and their boundaries overlap and shift. Still, the taxonomy helps to reveal 
some of the major questions and choices facing U.S. policymakers. 
It is clarifying, for example, to compare what each camp sees as the greatest risks for U.S. 
policy. Restrictionists most fear U.S. complacency during a brief window when China’s tech-
driven dominance can still be prevented. Cooperationists most fear U.S. overreaction result-
ing from inflated perceptions of Chinese tech threats and excessive confidence in restrictive 
measures. Centrists, hoping to avoid both these perils, most fear U.S. incapacity to achieve 
a successful balance. Key capacity challenges include securing public-private coordination, 
mapping complex supply chains, and overcoming Washington gridlock, polarization, and 
bureaucratic clumsiness. Ultimately, U.S. leaders must choose which fears (and hopes) they 
most identify with.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
JON BATEMAN 43 
This taxonomy also gives a rough guide to 
the changing direction of U.S. thought and 
policy. Cooperationism was the dominant 
view when Obama took office, and it still 
had some currency by the time he stepped 
down. The T rump administration’s poli -
cies and rhetoric became increasingly re -
strictionist over four years—though it sent 
contradictory signals, and T rump departed 
before a fully restrictionist vision could be realized. The Biden administration has so far re-
tained much of the T rump policy architecture, while speaking a language that sounds more 
centrist. For now, the center of gravity in Washington seems to lie somewhere between the 
centrist and restrictionist positions.
A CASE FOR A CENTRIST STRATEGY
The debate among restrictionists, cooperationists, and centrists cannot be resolved by a 
policy paper. Part of what separates these camps are divergent worldviews and values—
deep-seated disagreements about American priorities and purposes. The three camps also 
disagree about more tangible questions, such as how to understand China’s capabilities and 
intentions, what kind of political economy will produce the most innovation in the com -
ing decades, and how much influence the United States will have in shaping global tech -
nological choices. The answers to these questions will not be known for decades. For now, 
strategists and policy experts can only venture their best assessments based on incomplete 
data and personal beliefs—and, for some, perceived political advantage. Indeed, the biggest 
drivers of real-world U.S. strategy will probably be political: partisan dichotomies, public 
sentiment, business interests, media attention, and civil society advocacy.
Despite these limitations, expert analysis can still help to inform and guide political and 
public dialogues about U.S.-China technological decoupling. Analysts can present the 
strongest, clearest versions of each strategic position, and continually sharpen and dissemi-
nate their ideas in the face of critiques and evolving evidence. In that spirit, below are 
two brief arguments in support of the centrist position. First, narrow and targeted China-
focused technology restrictions can buy time for more positive U.S. investments to bear 
fruit, while reducing the costs and risks of decoupling. And second, a clearly articulated 
centrist strategy can help Washington maintain control of the pace and course of techno -
logical decoupling, thereby helping to prevent a runaway cycle that moves faster and further 
than U.S. leaders want.
Restrictionists fear U.S. 
complacency toward Chinese tech 
threats, while cooperationists fear 
U.S. overreaction. Meanwhile, 
centrists fear U.S. incapacity to 
navigate between both perils.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
44 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
BUYING TIME
The very existence of a heated debate among restrictionists, cooperationists, and centrists 
is itself an argument for the careful incrementalism that centrists espouse. 210 We are still 
in the early years of a radically new phase in U.S.-China relations, and we are only at the 
cusp of far-reaching global transformations promised by AI and other emerging technolo -
gies. These coming changes, while undoubtedly significant, remain difficult for present-
day observers to assess. How will China’s strategic intentions and technological capabilities 
change as the country further develops? How will cross-border data flows, new energy tech, 
or quantum computing reshape the global economy and security environment? How will 
countries of the world (and multinational companies) align themselves in a more fractured 
geo-technological landscape? How will the familiar costs and benefits of U.S.-China tech -
nological interdependence shift in the coming decades? There is simply no reliable way to 
answer these questions today. Policymakers should therefore play for time—preserving and 
expanding American options while the future comes into sharper focus.
Offense and defense. The primary effort should be a positive program to strengthen U.S. 
and allied technology ecosystems from within (the so-called “offensive” agenda). An offensive 
program would include new investments and incentives to bolster and diversify innovation 
pathways, supply chains, talent pipelines, and revenue models in strategic technology areas.
Such investments make sense regardless of how U.S.-China technology relations develop 
over time. If the United States ultimately concludes that full-scope technological decou -
pling has become necessary, then offensive investments will have prepared America to sepa-
rate with fewer costs and risks. But if American leaders eventually decide to maintain sub -
stantial tech ties with China, then the offensive measures will have positioned U.S. firms to 
compete more effectively in a globalized technology marketplace. Moreover, many offensive 
investments are worth making for their own sake, irrespective of the China challenge. Even 
if China did not exist, concerted efforts to strengthen the U.S. technology base would still 
help boost American productivity and economic dynamism.
Offensive investments like education and R&D take a long time to pay off. Conversely, 
“defensive” measures—government restrictions aimed at thwarting Chinese technological 
advancement or influence—are fast-acting and readily implemented. They should therefore 
be used to buy time for the offensive agenda to bear fruit. Specifically, Washington should 
impose new controls in technology areas where China seems close to securing unique, stra-
tegically significant, and long-lasting advantages. In such circumstances, defensive measures 
can help to forestall Chinese breakthroughs long enough for the United States to regroup 
and regain technological momentum.
Defense is not risk-free, however. U.S. tech controls can be costly (harming U.S. industries 
and innovators), imprecise (chilling more activity than intended or desired), and even fu -

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
JON BATEMAN 45 
tile (failing to substantially remedy the rel-
evant Chinese tech threats). And these side 
effects can be hard to predict, measure, and 
control. That is why restrictive tools should 
be confined to a secondary, supporting 
role and only used in compelling circum -
stances. Restrictive tools by themselves are 
incapable of ensuring U.S. technological 
preeminence over the long haul, but they can and should be used to frustrate Chinese dom-
inance in the short run. The right U.S. technology controls can help to preserve competitive 
opportunities while American offensive efforts better position the country to succeed and 
lead in key technologies.
Comparing technology areas. Consider 5G telecommunications equipment. The United 
States and many other countries have been in the process of purchasing large-scale 5G in -
frastructure that will likely operate for many years, providing the supplier country with a 
long-lasting technological beachhead as well as durable economic and political influence. 
Until 2019, Huawei and ZTE appeared set to secure Chinese dominance of the global 5G 
telecoms marketplace—occupying, for the foreseeable future, some of the most strategic 
terrain in cyberspace.211 Although no U.S. company competed on a one-for-one basis with 
Huawei or ZTE, multiple U.S. national security and economic interests were nevertheless 
at risk: protecting secrets, preventing sabotage, blunting the global influence of an adver -
sary, and more. This was a closing window of opportunity if there ever was one, and a clear 
impetus for defensive measures.
In response, the United States imposed a barrage of restrictions on ZTE and even more 
on Huawei: the Entity List, the Covered List, the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial 
Complex Companies List, the Section 889 blacklist, the special foreign direct product re -
strictions, the “remove and replace” rule, federal indictments of Huawei and its CFO, and 
visa bans for certain employees, among other actions. 212 Washington also waged a unique 
diplomatic campaign (branded for a time as “The Clean Network”) to dissuade third coun-
tries from buying Huawei and ZTE 5G equipment.
These moves were reasonably successful: several major countries opted not to purchase 
Chinese 5G gear, improving the market position of European competitors.213 Most impor-
tant, an open 5G architecture called O-RAN was given precious time to develop as a serious 
alternative, reducing the prospects of Chinese vendor lock-in and creating new openings for 
U.S. firms.214 Meanwhile, Washington took active steps to manage the costs of its telecoms 
decoupling efforts. It has paid for small U.S. carriers to replace Huawei and ZTE equip -
ment, helped finance certain third-country purchases of Western-made 5G gear, allowed 
U.S. chipmakers to retain some Huawei business, and drafted legislation to infuse the U.S. 
semiconductor sector with new federal funds.215
Fast-acting and readily 
implemented “defensive” 
restrictions can buy time for 
“offensive” investments, like 
education and R&D, to bear fruit.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
46 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
5G telecommunications equipment provided an especially compelling case for U.S. restric-
tions, because the United States faced a closing window of opportunity to prevent Chinese 
dominance of a strategic technology. But each technology area has a different strategic 
profile, and few of them will present as clear-cut a case for so many restrictive measures. AI 
software, social media platforms, smartphones, drones, Internet of Things devices, routers, 
advanced batteries, semiconductors, cloud services: they all have distinct national security 
implications, economic impacts, marketplace dynamics, supply chains, and innovation tra-
jectories. In many cases, strong new U.S. government technology controls could do more 
harm than good.
Balancing global challenges. One reason for caution is the existence of other urgent 
crises, beyond Chinese tech threats, that compete for Washington’s resources and atten -
tion and can sometimes clash with technological decoupling. Even as the United States 
engages in bilateral power struggles with China (and other state adversaries), it faces global 
and domestic challenges that are arguably still more daunting and have their own closing 
windows of opportunity. At a global level, COVID-19 exemplifies the perils of today’s 
interconnected world. Contagions—in the form of infectious diseases, financial crises, or 
cyber catastrophes—loom on many fronts, requiring new forms of collective action across 
geopolitical divides.216 The most obvious of these enormous threats is climate change.
While decoupling might seem like a solution to excess interconnectedness, global chal -
lenges cannot be solved without deep global cooperation. If Washington and Beijing cannot 
come together with others to address shared risks, then any U.S. national accomplishments 
may be washed out by a rising tide of global calamity. It is imperative that U.S. government 
policies toward China—including tech policy—address these larger problems and avoid 
making them worse.
For example, Washington should think 
twice before walling itself off from Chinese 
clean energy technology such as solar cells, 
wind turbines, and advanced batteries. 
Granted, some Chinese clean tech compa -
nies have benefited from unfair practices 
like intellectual property theft, and the 
United States has powerful motivations to 
protect and nurture its own industries in these emerging strategic sectors. 217 Yet the world 
has years, not decades, to avoid catastrophic and irreversible climate damage; any delays 
in the deployment of low-carbon-intensive infrastructure would require powerful justifi -
cations.218 By the same token, U.S. sanctions on Beijing’s national tech champions should 
avoid inflicting so much Chinese economic pain that bilateral climate cooperation breaks 
down. In September 2021, China’s climate envoy made the not-unreasonable case that 
climate “cannot possibly be divorced” from other friction points: “The U.S. side hopes 
Even as the United States engages 
in bilateral power struggles with 
China, it faces global and domestic 
challenges that are arguably still 
more daunting and urgent.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
JON BATEMAN 47 
that climate cooperation can be an ‘oasis’ in China-U.S. relations, but if that ‘oasis’ is sur -
rounded by desert, it will also become desertified sooner or later.”219 
Balancing domestic challenges. Domestically, the U.S. political system is floundering, 
its social cohesion fraying, and its economic promise hollowing for too many people. These 
trends have complex, multi-decadal causes but have dangerously accelerated in recent years. 
It was only a year ago that the United States suffered an abortive insurrection, and most ex-
perts believe that American democracy remains unstable. U.S. policymakers must therefore 
focus much of their attention on the home front, even at some risk to traditional national 
security priorities such as addressing Chinese tech threats.220 For example, the U.S. govern-
ment’s ongoing crackdown on Chinese graduate students and researchers cannot be allowed 
to trigger a mass exodus of Chinese undergraduates, who pose little security risk yet pay bil-
lions of tuition dollars, in effect subsidizing educational opportunity for many Americans.
In sum, an overaggressive technological decoupling can set back other national priorities 
that may matter more or come to a head sooner. This does not negate the risks of U.S.-
China technological interdependence, which are real and will likely grow in years ahead. 
But the United States must balance the troubling possibilities of tomorrow against the 
lethal dangers of today. This means buying additional time for U.S. leaders to assess geo-
technological developments, juggle domestic and global crises, and implement long-term 
investments in American technological strength. Select defensive measures can extend these 
timelines—helping to lay the groundwork for greater technological independence in the 
future, should it become needed, even as most U.S.-China tech ties are allowed to endure 
for now. Balancing in this way can help hedge against multiple scenarios, from full-scope 
decoupling to relative technological integration.
MAINTAINING CONTROL
Time is one of two decisional resources that Washington must conserve as it manages tech-
nological decoupling. The other key resource is control over the decoupling process—the 
ability to set its pace and scope so that decoupling aligns with American needs. Granted, 
the U.S. government has never had total control. Beijing maintains its own long-standing 
limits on foreign technology; other governments have significant influence on global sup -
ply chains and markets; and companies around the world make private calculations about 
cross-border investments and deals. Nevertheless, the distinct wave of technological de -
coupling that began in the mid-2010s was initially of Washington’s design—set in motion 
by the U.S. government’s purposeful, albeit ill-coordinated campaign of China-oriented 
restrictions. Other actors have been comparably reactive (maneuvering in response to U.S. 
policy) and cautious (often seeking to conserve the status quo ante). This kept the U.S. 
government in the driver’s seat, letting American officials advance decoupling as they saw 
fit while stopping short wherever they perceived risks to U.S. interests.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
48 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
That privileged position could not last for long. As decoupling progresses, various foreign 
and domestic actors have increasingly sought to seize initiative for themselves—seeking to 
shape the decoupling process rather than remain at the mercy of U.S. government policy. 
These dynamics, explored below, create a risk of feedback loops: each new U.S. technology 
control strengthens the incentives for others to retaliate in kind, or to get ahead of the next 
Washington restriction, which accelerates decoupling beyond what U.S. officials intend. If 
Washington fails to monitor and manage these escalatory dynamics, it could accidentally 
set in motion a frenzied, ever-intensifying cycle of decoupling that races well past what 
America can afford.
Figure 4: The U.S. Government Is Just One of Many Actors Shaping 
Technological Decoupling
FIGURE 4
The U.S. Government Is Just One of Many Actors Shaping Technological Decoupling
Source: Author’s elaboration.
U.S. Government
Chinese Government
Other Governments
GOVERNMENT
INFLUENCE
United States
China
Other
PRIVATE
INFLUENCE
United States
China
Other
U.S. Private Actors
Chinese Private Actors
Other Private Actors
Source: Author's elaboration.
Preemptive action by outside actors. The first kind of feedback loop involves outside ac-
tors seeking to anticipate and preempt future rounds of U.S. technology restrictions. Now that 
U.S.-China technology decoupling is well underway, companies, universities, investors, and 
other actors around the world want to avoid being caught in the maelstrom. This means not 
making significant long-term commitments that could be vulnerable to collapse if the U.S.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
JON BATEMAN 49 
government decided to impose new technology controls. In essence, these actors could “self-
decouple” now, on their own terms, rather than risk a more abrupt and forceful U.S. govern-
ment mandate later. The more restrictive measures that Washington imposes, the more outside 
actors will look to stay ahead of the curve. The consequences could potentially snowball, caus-
ing much more extensive technological decoupling than the U.S. government intends.
A vivid example came in July 2020, when 
the Justice Department announced the 
indictment of six Chinese researchers for 
hiding their affiliations with the PLA. 
Following these six indictments, more than 
one thousand other Chinese researchers re-
portedly left the United States. “The breadth 
and depth of the exodus was not expected,” 
an anonymous U.S. official told the Washington Post.221 James Mulvenon, who has written 
extensively on China tech threats, told the newspaper that “he does not believe there were 
1,000 active PLA-linked researchers in the United States but said it is possible many research-
ers affiliated with state institutes and universities left over the last year because they feared they 
might lose their fellowships.” In other words, the U.S. government failed to anticipate that 
its small action would trigger a huge counterreaction, disrupting vast amounts of legitimate 
research activity. In the end, the Justice Department dropped charges against five of the six 
defendants. Still, it claimed to have “advanced our deterrence objectives,” citing the mass exo-
dus of Chinese researchers as a positive development.222 The whole episode casts significant 
doubt on Washington’s ability to predict and adequately weigh the collateral consequences of 
its China-tech actions.
Chilling effects from vague restrictions. The episode also illustrates a more general 
problem: vague or opaque U.S. government restrictions can chill far more technological 
activity than policymakers intend. There are many impediments to designing precise U.S. 
controls. Major “technologies” that Washington seeks to protect (such as AI, 5G, micro -
electronics, and drones) are really high-level constructs and systems-of-systems built from 
multiple interlinked technology families. Their smaller subelements (for example, advanced 
batteries that might power drones or electric cars) have complex global supply chains and 
innumerable uses and users. Agencies struggle to divvy up this mass of technological inter-
connections into clean administrative categories. And their criteria for doing so—premised 
on such notions as “national security” and, increasingly, “economic security”—are poorly 
conceptualized and highly contested. Early-stage technologies pose particular regulatory 
challenges because their future impact can only be guessed.
In the face of these uncertainties and administrative dilemmas, U.S. government agen -
cies often take what they view as a cautious approach. They announce broad, open-ended 
authorities that would permit—but not require—a sweeping range of new government 
Companies and foreign govern-
ments could “self-decouple” now, 
on their own terms, rather than risk 
a more abrupt and forceful U.S. 
government mandate later.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
50 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
technology restrictions. The government can then apply these authorities on a case-by-case 
basis, deliberating in secret and weighing a host of variables. This approach maximizes flex-
ibility: enforcement can be dialed up or down based on new data, circumstances, and po -
litical imperatives. Its ambiguity also makes it harder for adversaries to identify and exploit 
loopholes in Washington’s decisionmaking framework. Examples of this approach include 
CFIUS reviews, enforcement of the Commerce Department’s new ICTS supply chain se -
curity rule, the licensing process for many export-controlled items, and designations under 
many sanctions authorities.
However, too much discretion can ulti -
mately be self-defeating. A major risk is 
that outside stakeholders see these opaque 
technology control regimes as risky and 
unpredictable, thereby chilling activity that 
could otherwise benefit the United States. 
Consider the T rump administration’s visa 
ban for Chinese graduate students and researchers affiliated with Beijing’s “military-civil fu-
sion” programs; the ban left many key terms undefined, including what affiliations would 
be disqualifying. The policy’s ambiguity generated widespread confusion about its scope and 
impact. A rigorous analysis by Georgetown’s Center for Security and Emerging T echnology 
tentatively “suggest[ed] 3,000 to 5,000 as a reasonable range for the annual number of stu-
dents affected,” calling this “a low-confidence estimate” and warning that the real number 
“would be much larger” if “military-civil fusion” was interpreted more broadly than the report 
assumed.223 (The study was “unable to assess” the impact on Chinese nonstudent researchers 
due to a lack of publicly available data.) T oday, more than eighteen months after the policy 
was announced, there is still no official public account of its key parameters.
Confronting this uncertainty, many Chinese graduate students and researchers can be expect-
ed simply to avoid applying to U.S. universities. Many U.S. universities will likewise avoid 
admitting or hiring certain Chinese applicants—even in cases where there was no national 
security risk and a visa might actually have been granted. (U.S. officials have offered rough 
estimates of visa revocations and denials, but have not yet publicly addressed potential chilling 
effects.)224 Moreover, such dynamics can become self-reinforcing. Chinese graduate students 
and researchers diverted from the United States will go somewhere else instead, and eventually 
these alternate academic paths could become popular or even default options. The net result 
could be large, long-term reductions in American access to top academic talent.
Chinese government retaliation. Another feedback loop stems from Beijing’s retaliation 
against U.S. technology controls aimed at China, which creates a risk of lengthy tit-for-tat 
reactions or escalatory spirals. So far, Beijing’s responses have generally been reciprocal. 225 
For example, it established an “unreliable entities list” following increased U.S. use of the 
Entity List, and Beijing imposed new technology export controls after related moves by 
U.S. agencies often announce broad, 
open-ended restrictive authorities 
they can then apply on a case-by-
case basis, deliberating in secret and 
weighing a host of variables.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
JON BATEMAN 51 
Washington.226 But future responses could be more damaging. Many in Beijing believe that 
the United States is intent on destroying the Chinese technology ecosystem, and Chinese 
domestic narratives about tech competition have become increasingly nationalistic. 227 A 
particularly harsh U.S. restriction, or the overall accumulation of controls, may cause China 
to step up its responses or broaden them into new areas. Alternatively, Beijing might over-
react due to misperceived U.S. intentions.
Retaliation by China could put pressure on Washington to respond in kind, risking a repeti-
tive cycle that takes decoupling further or faster than the United States initially envisioned. 
For example, the U.S. order for ByteDance to divest from TikT ok was followed, less than a 
year later, by China’s pressure on ride-hailing company DiDi to de-list from the New York 
Stock Exchange.228 Although Beijing probably had multiple motivations for reining in DiDi, 
it publicly cited data security concerns, mirroring Washington’s main justification for the 
TikT ok order. Beijing’s abrupt exercise of power over DiDi aggravated U.S. leaders’ worries 
that Chinese companies fail to disclose regulatory (and other) risks and are in Beijing’s thrall. 
Several senators seized upon the episode to promote an accelerated timeline for de-listing 
all Chinese companies from American exchanges under the Holding Foreign Companies 
Accountable Act.229 These moves and countermoves illustrate how easily escalatory spirals 
could be set in motion.
China has many cards to play if it chooses to step up its retaliation for U.S. tech restrictions. 
For example, it could dissuade or bar Chinese undergraduates from attending U.S. univer-
sities, depriving the United States of billions of dollars in tuition revenue at a time when 
many American institutions of higher learning are struggling financially.230 It could impose 
controls on the rare earth metals required for many important technologies, which China 
nearly monopolizes.231 It could further limit the activities of U.S. tech companies operating 
in China, bar or unwind U.S. investments and joint ventures, or ban the purchase of certain 
U.S. tech products. And if Beijing seeks to respond outside of the technology domain, the 
possibilities are open-ended.
These Chinese retaliation options illuminate vulnerabilities that U.S. leaders should try to 
address over time. For now, however, they are realities of interdependence. They highlight 
the damage America could suffer if decoupling gets out of hand and is no longer being 
controlled by Washington. Granted, China would also suffer in the process, so a measure of 
deterrence almost certainly exists. Nevertheless, history is replete with examples of destruc-
tive, seemingly irrational cycles of international escalation. A responsible U.S. strategy for 
technological decoupling must account for and mitigate this risk. 
Domestic political dynamics. Finally, U.S. technology controls can shape domestic poli-
tics in ways that encourage ever-stronger restrictions in the future. Politically speaking, 
China-related controls—like other kinds of U.S. sanctions and restrictions targeting ad -
versaries—are easy to impose and hard to reverse. Congress has also repeatedly stepped in

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
52 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
to turn discretionary executive measures into permanent statutory requirements. The result 
is a one-way ratchet, gradually limiting the policy space of each successive administration.
Biden, for example, has so far opted to retain many T rump policies that were highly contro-
versial when first instituted—including the China tariffs and the unique foreign direct prod-
uct rule applied to Huawei. Biden also allowed T rump’s sweeping ICTS regulation to come 
into effect, surprising multiple business groups that had called the rule unworkable. Although 
Biden may actively support some of these measures, politics are probably a factor in others. 
The Wall Street Journal reported that “administration officials [were] concerned that blocking 
or diluting the [ICTS] rule would send the wrong message about the new administration’s 
approach to China, potentially fueling criticism that it [was] taking a weaker approach.”232
The economic impact of U.S. government technology restrictions can also ripple into the 
political arena. For example, a U.S. import ban on certain Chinese tech products could 
economically weaken the American resellers of those products. If those resellers ultimately 
exit the marketplace, that would mean fewer voices advocating for bilateral tech coopera -
tion. Conversely, hawkish voices tend to thrive in a restrictive and securitized environment. 
Palantir, whose data products are used by the U.S. national security establishment, has 
emerged as a strong advocate of technological decoupling.233 Washington’s drive to counter 
China tech threats creates business and political opportunities for companies like Palantir, 
potentially fueling the rise of a well-connected decoupling lobby. There is already a long 
American tradition of defense and national security contractors exerting influence over 
public policy—for example, by supporting political candidates and thinkers who warn of 
foreign threats and advocate muscular U.S. responses. T echnology controls aimed at China 
could unleash similar dynamics, as a subset of U.S. tech companies will benefit from such 
restrictions and work to entrench or expand them. 
In sum, Washington might aim for a moderate level of technological decoupling but end 
up with something broader, faster, and messier. The risks are serious and demand a strategic 
response. The United States must preserve the ability to adjust the decoupling process up -
ward or downward—keeping its pace and scope aligned with American needs. That means 
U.S. technology restrictions should be kept as targeted and precise as possible to minimize 
the risk of unwanted escalation. Moreover, Washington must communicate its intentions 
clearly and convincingly to multiple audiences. It should openly clarify its strategic objec -
tives, and even some specific policy criteria, to reassure companies, universities, and foreign 
governments—including China—of its intentions. This degree of clarity cuts against the 
American grain: U.S. political and national security leaders like to preserve their own dis -
cretion, and they struggle to make credible commitments across presidential administra -
tions. But in a complex and interdependent global technology landscape, too much silence 
or ambiguity may actually cede control to others.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
53 
TRANSLATING STRATEGY INTO 
POLICY AND PROCESS
The previous chapter argued for a centrist technological decoupling strategy in which U.S. 
government restrictions play a small but important role. Government tech restrictions by 
themselves cannot ensure U.S. technological preeminence over the long haul, but they 
can sometimes frustrate Chinese dominance in the short run. The United States should 
therefore focus its restrictions on a select set of technology areas where China verges on 
securing unique, strategically significant, and long-lasting advantages. This would buy time 
for longer-term investments in American technological leadership, competitiveness, and 
resilience to succeed—helping the United States address the full range of its tech challenges, 
including those that only partially relate to China. Carefully tailoring and communicating 
these restrictive policies would also help Washington preserve its influence over the pace 
and scope of technological decoupling, reducing the likelihood of a damaging runaway 
process. A balanced approach to the U.S.-China technology relationship would provide 
American leaders with maximum options during an era of strategic uncertainty and flux. 
It would also improve the odds of bilateral cooperation on urgent global challenges, like 
climate change, and preserve space to address pressing domestic crises.
Not everyone will agree with this strategy. Restrictionists may find it naïve, and coopera -
tionists may consider it dangerous. So much the better; American policymakers need to hear 
robust debate, especially in this early phase of technological decoupling. Responsible voices 
from all three camps should continue weighing in on the most fundamental questions: In 
what ways does today’s U.S.-China technology relationship help or hurt America—in the 
technology arena, and beyond? How will this cost-benefit calculus change over time, and

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
54 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
how should the United States balance its present and future needs amid inherent uncer -
tainty? Meanwhile, how can Washington maintain control of the technological decoupling 
process and prevent triggering a more severe, violent break than it intends? Strategies should 
be judged by the clarity, factual grounding, and analytical rigor of their answers to these 
questions.
THE NEED FOR PRACTICAL GUIDANCE
Once a strategy is established, it must then be translated into policies and processes to guide 
U.S. government decisions. Without a practical set of standards, even the best strategy can 
result in inconsistent and ad hoc decisionmaking. In particular, the U.S. government must 
devise ways to determine which technology areas require China-related restrictions and 
which do not. While restrictionists, centrists, and cooperationists have varying appetites for 
technological decoupling and China-oriented controls, they must all face a version of this 
line-drawing problem when turning their high-level visions into tangible policy.
Meaningful guidance must move past generalities and express clear choices. That means de-
scribing what different federal agencies should do with specific authorities that they have. It 
is no simple task. Analytically, it requires evaluating a host of technology areas and weighing 
numerous costs and benefits through the lens of multiple expert disciplines. Politically, the 
charged tenor of China discourse in the United States makes American leaders and analysts 
reluctant to publicly cheerlead any form of bilateral technology cooperation, even where the 
benefits outweigh the costs. Thus, while many observers say that technological decoupling 
should be bounded and partial, there are 
few comprehensive, detailed proposals for 
how and where to draw such boundaries.
The easy part is identifying the highest-
risk, most strategically sensitive technology 
areas where U.S. government controls are 
clearly desirable. 5G telecommunications equipment and semiconductors are two well-
known examples. The United States has already imposed substantial restrictions in both 
areas, and experts broadly support them even while debating key details. The hard part, 
often, is naming lower-risk areas—technologies where continued U.S.-China interdepen -
dence would be permissible and actually beneficial to American interests. But Washington 
needs real limits to bound the decoupling process and prevent a costly, self-destructive over-
reach. The more clearly such limits can be articulated in practical policymaking standards, 
the more effectively the U.S. government can make decisions and manage the expectations 
of other governments and private actors worldwide.
Any strategy for technological 
decoupling must face a line-drawing 
problem when turning its high-level 
vision into tangible policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
JON BATEMAN 55 
BREAKING DOWN THE POLICY PROBLEMS
This report takes a step-by-step approach to develop useful policy guidance. It begins by 
breaking down the many U.S. interests at stake into nine distinct policy objectives for tech-
nological decoupling. National security objectives include maintaining a military edge over 
China, limiting Chinese national security espionage, preventing Chinese sabotage in a crisis, 
limiting Chinese influence operations, and denying support for Chinese or China-enabled 
authoritarianism and repression. Economic objectives include countering unfair Chinese 
practices and intellectual property theft, and competing and leading in strategic industries. 
Then there are ancillary objectives—non-technology goals that also influence American 
decoupling policy: obtaining general leverage over China, and shaping U.S. domestic nar -
ratives. These nine objectives, although linked, raise many distinct issues and dilemmas. 
They cannot be treated as interchangeable 
responses to an undifferentiated mass of 
“China tech threats”—an all-too-typical 
approach. Of course, real-world decision -
making often involves weighing multiple 
policy objectives simultaneously.
The next step, and the heart of this report, 
is a careful review of the role U.S. technol-
ogy controls should play in achieving these 
policy objectives. Taking each objective in turn, the report weighs the risks and benefits of 
U.S.-China technological interdependence against the risks and benefits of U.S. govern -
ment technology controls, in line with the overall (centrist) strategy described above. 234 
This analysis leads to a series of proposed dividing lines—implementable standards for de -
termining which technology areas warrant U.S. government restrictions and which do not. 
Specific examples help to illustrate how these dividing lines would work in practice. Finally, 
there are brief discussions of “offensive” (domestic self-improvement) measures critical for 
achieving each policy objective. While technology controls are the primary subject of this 
report, they must not become the primary focus of policymakers.
Because U.S. policymakers face complex dilemmas, these recommendations would require 
further vetting and debate by implementing agencies. They would also need refinement to 
a higher level of detail. While this report’s proposals aim to be specific and actionable, agen-
cies need to draw still finer distinctions in real-world policymaking. For this reason, many 
of the recommendations lay out analytic processes that agencies should follow—questions 
to ask, objectives to prioritize, and standards to apply—rather than firm outcomes. Case 
studies illustrate how these processes might play out in specific technology areas, though 
agencies would need to arrive at their own conclusions based on internal expertise (includ-
ing classified information) and outside perspectives.
Technological decoupling can 
serve many distinct U.S. policy 
objectives. These cannot be treated 
as interchangeable responses to 
an undifferentiated mass of 
“China tech threats.”

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
56 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Reasoned deliberation does not always determine actual U.S. policy, of course. Political 
imperatives, unexpected crises, and bureaucratic quirks all play a role. But it is essential 
for Washington to develop strong decisionmaking processes to inform the use of China-
oriented technology controls. Good processes push high-level U.S. officials to consider key 
issues earlier, more frequently, and in a more focused, structured way than would oth -
erwise happen. They frame policy dilemmas for principals and help to clarify questions 
that require resolution by the president. Over time, high-quality government deliberations 
also teach the permanent national security apparatus—the many thousands of staffers and 
outside analysts who shape conventional thinking in Washington—to ask better questions 
about technological decoupling.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
57 
MAINTAINING A MILITARY 
EDGE OVER CHINA
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
America’s most senior military officers and civilian defense leaders in both parties have 
grown increasingly alarmed by China’s advancing military capabilities. Unclassified U.S. 
intelligence assessments describe the PLA as slowly but steadily transforming itself “from 
a defensive, inflexible ground-based force charged with domestic and peripheral security 
responsibilities to a joint, highly agile, expeditionary, and power-projecting arm of Chinese 
foreign policy that engages in military diplomacy and operations across the globe.”235 U.S. 
forces, by comparison, have deferred some of their own modernization programs and 
declined in readiness across many areas since 2001, partly due to a preoccupation with 
counterterrorism and counterinsurgency. Even after the Afghanistan withdrawal, America’s 
enormous and highly capable military remains spread thin across a number of global mis -
sions—whereas the PLA has been optimizing for a few key objectives in its local theater. 
T ogether, these trends have led the Pentagon to warn of a diminished “competitive edge” 
over China.236
T echnology plays a key part in China’s military catch-up. Beijing has made major strides in 
modernizing its conventional hardware and nuclear weapons systems—aided, at times, by 
cyber and traditional espionage. Looking ahead, many U.S. analysts are especially worried 
about the PLA’s incorporation of emerging digital technologies such as AI and quantum 
computing. China believes that AI, in particular, will eventually enable “intelligentized 
warfare”—a more rapid, precise, and dispersed form of combat intended to paralyze enemy 
forces and decisionmakers.237

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
58 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Because AI and so many other militarily relevant technologies are dual-use, the PLA seeks 
technical support from Chinese companies and universities under the banner of “mili -
tary-civil fusion.” Seamless fusion remains more aspiration than reality; however, Beijing 
is working to break down bureaucratic barriers and enhance incentives for private support 
to the military.238 It also has many legal and extra-legal tools to compel such cooperation 
for high-priority military programs. This makes the U.S. defense establishment leery of 
technological cooperation between American and Chinese businesses or universities. The 
Pentagon fears that Beijing will leverage such links to acquire military-relevant technology, 
whether through licit means (such as joint ventures) or illicit means (like hacking).239
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
The need to maintain a military edge over China offers powerful justification for U.S. 
technology controls. But what sort of controls can achieve American military needs at ac -
ceptable overall cost to the U.S. national interest? A narrowly tailored set of restrictions 
makes the most sense for several reasons. First, although AI and other emerging, dual-use 
technologies may someday become key factors in the U.S.-China military balance, that day 
is probably a long way off. The coming wave of military-technological advances will likely 
produce a marathon competition that lasts many years or even decades. This means the 
United States should prioritize the long-term sustainment of American innovative capacity 
rather than the short-term curtailment of Chinese military advances. T echnology controls 
that durably set back PLA modernization would be worthwhile, but restrictions that de -
grade America’s own technology base while 
only briefly disrupting Chinese progress 
would be counterproductive.
T o gauge the near-term role of AI in U.S.-
China military competition, consider a po-
tential confrontation in the Taiwan Strait 
occurring in the next few years—the cen -
tral worry of today’s U.S. defense leaders. 
According to most analysts, the outcome of a Chinese incursion would likely hinge on 
such traditional factors as the PLA’s competence in amphibious assaults, the readiness of 
Taiwan’s defensive forces and the willpower of its civilian population and leaders, and the 
U.S. military’s regional force posture and rules of engagement.240 AI would certainly not be 
decisive. A recent analysis of Chinese military contracts found that, “like the United States, 
China’s most promising AI applications so far seem to be for back-office tasks like intel -
ligence analysis and predictive maintenance.”241
At what point will military AI become important enough to swing a battle between 
U.S. and Chinese forces? The National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence—
It will likely take many years or 
even decades before AI and other 
emerging, dual-use technologies 
become key factors in the 
U.S.-China military balance.

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
JON BATEMAN 59 
the leading mainstream assessment—placed this risk “in the coming decades.”242 And how 
likely is it that Chinese AI would one day be sufficient to offset U.S. military advantages in 
other areas? The commission was appropriately cautious, simply noting that Beijing “be -
lieves” this could happen. DOD’s most recent public report on the Chinese military also 
hedged on whether, how, and when emerging technologies like AI or quantum computing 
might affect real-world combat. The report rightly gave more weight to less exotic develop-
ments, such as China’s ballistic and cruise missile advancements, its anti-satellite capabili -
ties, its increasingly realistic joint exercises, and other modernization efforts. 243 Of course, 
the era of AI warfare will come eventually and the U.S. military must work hard to prepare 
for it. But the longer this technology competition lasts, the less likely it is that U.S. restric-
tions will hold Chinese advances at bay.244
Second, the Pentagon’s “competitive edge” concept is notably vague and open-ended, mak-
ing it a poor guide for determining which technologies merit U.S. government restric -
tions.245 Nearly all technology has some military application, and the U.S. military sees 
itself “competing” with China in innumerable ways and places—from combat contingen -
cies in the Indo-Pacific to steady-state information operations and defense diplomacy in 
Africa and Latin America. Controlling all the technologies relevant to such competition 
would mean a total amputation of U.S.-China tech ties—choking the American economy 
that funds defense spending, and degrading the U.S. innovation base that supports military 
capability development.
DOD has never actually called for full-scope decoupling; in fact, the DOD-aligned JASON 
group of scientific advisers has argued that international technical cooperation is vital to 
American interests.246 Yet U.S. military leaders have sometimes flirted with more restric -
tionist ideas—for example, generically opposing Americans’ involvement in the Chinese 
AI sector.247 Such ideas, if pursued to their logical conclusion, could lead to broad-based 
technological decoupling.
Finally, the U.S.-China rivalry is not just military in nature, and Washington will likely 
rely more on economic and diplomatic tools in the years to come. That is because the cur-
rent U.S. military “competitive edge” over China, diminished as it is, probably cannot be 
sustained. China has natural geographic advantages in its home theater, whereas U.S. forces 
must operate costly and vulnerable expeditionary bases and logistics lines. China’s defense 
budget will probably keep growing faster than American spending, which is projected to 
stay flat or rise slowly in real terms. 248 The technologically inferior PLA can close many 
existing gaps at a faster pace than the U.S. military can create new ones. And for many 
military scenarios, such as a Taiwan Strait confrontation, Beijing will be more invested in 
the outcome and more politically capable of absorbing losses than Washington.
Of course, the United States should take all reasonable measures to mitigate these mili -
tary disadvantages. But a detailed study by the RAND Corporation found that “as long as

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
60 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
the Chinese economy continues to grow faster than that of the United States and Beijing 
continues to make military modernization a priority, the challenges facing U.S. military 
planners in Asia will grow more severe over time.” 249 This means that other tools of U.S. 
national power will be crucial for managing China’s rise—something Beijing itself appears 
to recognize.250 Thus, Washington should avoid technology restrictions that yield immedi-
ate yet modest military gains but inflict larger, longer-term economic and diplomatic costs 
on the United States.
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
The Defense Department must focus and prioritize its concerns about Chinese tech. 
Specifically, DOD should identify future PLA technology milestones that would tangi -
bly change military outcomes over a concrete time horizon. This rigor would help federal 
regulators design more targeted technological controls that achieve military needs while 
minimizing harm to other national interests.
A good starting point would be DOD’s China-related defense planning scenarios—a clas -
sified set of priority missions that might include, for example, helping to defend and/or 
resupply Taiwan.251 For each planning scenario, DOD could seek to identify what poten -
tial new PLA technological capabilities would most significantly increase the likelihood of 
U.S. mission failure. The time horizon being considered would shape the nature of DOD’s 
analysis. DOD could make fairly concrete 
predictions about what technologies will 
matter most during the next five or ten 
years, because U.S. and Chinese opera -
tional concepts will not drastically change 
during that time and most key technologies 
either already exist or have been theorized. 
T o assess military-critical technologies on a 
longer timeline, DOD would need to make 
more speculative predictions, such as how early-stage technologies may mature over de -
cades, and what the American and Chinese militaries of the future will look and fight like. 
Proposed controls on early-stage technologies should therefore meet a higher threshold of 
criticality and undergo more rigorous vetting.
Although DOD has formidable internal expertise in offices such as the Strategic Intelligence 
and Analysis Cell, its assessments should draw generously from the insights of indepen -
dent technologists, military analysts, and China experts to avoid myopia and groupthink. 
Existing channels for engaging outside experts, like the JASON group, may need to be 
expanded or supplemented to account for the difficulty of making long-term technology 
predictions and the need to consider implications for a wide range of U.S. interests beyond 
DOD should use its defense planning 
scenarios to identify future PLA 
technology milestones that would 
tangibly change military outcomes 
over a concrete time horizon.

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
JON BATEMAN 61 
defense. The Intelligence Community should also provide an independent check on DOD’s 
assessments. Once military-critical technologies have been identified, intelligence analysts 
should assess the likelihood of the PLA actually acquiring these technologies and effectively 
fielding them over different time horizons. Analysts would also evaluate China’s relative 
dependence on foreign tech transfer, as opposed to its indigenous ability to develop the 
same technologies.
Regulators would then consider the efficacy of potential technology controls, and an in -
teragency review led by the National Security Council (NSC) would evaluate second- and 
third-order impacts, such as economic and diplomatic implications. Interagency review 
has long been the norm for many kinds of technology controls. But given the growing 
importance of dual-use technology, private sector–led “spin-on” innovation, and globalized 
supply chains, the NSC should assess whether current deliberative processes are sufficiently 
comprehensive and inclusive.
CASE STUDIES
Drone swarms. Drone swarms are a potential example of militarily significant technol -
ogy that might merit new U.S. technology restrictions. Many military analysts worry that 
large swarms of cheap, autonomous, self-coordinating drones could neutralize U.S. military 
advantages over China.252 They fear that China could deploy these drone swarms to over -
whelm and destroy large, expensive, relatively immobile American assets like aircraft carri-
ers. If that fear is well-grounded, then China’s development and successful fielding of this 
technology could swing the balance of a strategically consequential battle.
Still, U.S. technology controls would only make sense if they could be effective in protect-
ing America’s military edge. China’s world-class commercial drone industry is mostly indig-
enous, reducing the U.S. government’s influence over Chinese advancements. In late 2020, 
the T rump administration added DJI, the global market leader in drones, to the Entity List 
based on human rights violations. David Benowitz, an industry analyst and former DJI 
official, identified several U.S.-origin parts that DJI would need to replace following this 
designation. Still, he predicted the move would not “severely impact” the company.253
Swarming, an aspect of drone technology that remains in development, could have distinct 
chokepoints for U.S. controls to target. Key hardware components of drone swarms, like 
high-fidelity short-range communication equipment, might perhaps be controllable (as -
suming China does not already lead in these areas). Some software components, however—
like computer vision algorithms—would be harder to control because they are intangible, 
under development by many international companies, and often based on openly published 
academic research.

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
62 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Xiaomi. The final days of T rump’s presidency offered a vivid example of poorly designed 
technology controls, when DOD designated the consumer electronics giant Xiaomi as a 
“Communist Chinese Military Company.” This status, a forerunner of Biden’s Non-SDN 
Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List, would have prohibited Americans 
from investing in the company. DOD’s justification was shockingly thin. It highlighted 
Xiaomi’s plans to invest in 5G and AI—two broad, loosely defined technology areas that 
most global companies are pursuing—and the fact that Xiaomi was once publicly rec -
ognized by a Chinese ministry. Xiaomi later won a court injunction after a federal judge 
found the company did not meet the legal criteria for designation and DOD “could not 
identify any transfers of technology from Xiaomi to the PRC.” 254 Biden has since reversed 
this designation and overhauled the underlying regulatory process, placing the T reasury 
Department in charge.255
Broad technology categories like “AI,” “Big Data,” or “the Internet of Things” are not ap -
propriate targets for military-related technology restrictions. They are too ubiquitous to 
control, and too generic to meaningfully assess for military impact. Unfortunately, the U.S. 
government does not always recognize this. The Commerce Department’s new ICTS sup -
ply chain rule requires special scrutiny for any China-related technology “integral to: (A) 
Artificial intelligence and machine learning; (B) Quantum key distribution; (C) Quantum 
computing; (D) Drones; (E) Autonomous systems; or (F) Advanced Robotics.”256 These are 
diverse and capacious categories. They can be a starting point for further analysis, but U.S. 
government decisionmaking must be far more granular.
Supercomputers. Supercomputers pro -
vide another case study that illustrates the 
complexity of U.S. efforts to control mil -
itary-relevant technology. The U.S. gov -
ernment has long sought to prevent the 
Chinese military from acquiring powerful 
supercomputers due to their important 
role in advanced cryptography and in the 
design and development of nuclear weapons, missiles, and other military systems. 257 For 
decades, Washington relied on export controls of finished supercomputers, permitting their 
sale to China only if they would not be used for military purposes. 258 But U.S. restrictions 
have recently broadened. The United States now uses its Entity List to target entire Chinese 
organizations involved in supercomputing—restricting them from obtaining a wide range 
of U.S. components and other goods, not just supercomputers themselves.259
Although these initial designations focused on organizations owned or controlled by the 
PLA, they have sprawled since 2015.260 T oday the Entity List covers nearly all major players 
in the Chinese supercomputing ecosystem, including high-performance chip designers, su-
percomputer manufacturers, and supercomputer operators.261 According to the Commerce 
Broad technology categories like 
“AI,” “Big Data,” or “the Internet of 
Things” are too ubiquitous to control 
and too generic to meaningfully 
assess for military impact.

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
JON BATEMAN 63 
Department, these organizations have varying ties to the PLA. Secretary of Commerce 
Gina Raimondo explained that “supercomputing capabilities are vital for the development 
of many—perhaps almost all—modern weapons and national security systems, such as 
nuclear weapons and hypersonic weapons.”262 But that is hardly all, or even most, of what 
some of these entities do. Like supercomputing organizations around the world, they also 
support biomedical research, weather forecasting, electric grid management, oil and gas 
exploration, and countless other benign activities.263
On one level, this increasing use of the Entity List makes sense. China has transitioned from 
purchasing foreign supercomputers to building its own, so U.S. technology controls will 
be more effective if they target the latter process instead of the former.264 Yet the change in 
U.S. regulatory tools has also implied a subtle but important de facto shift in U.S. policy to-
ward China’s technological development. Before, Washington specifically opposed Beijing’s 
military use of supercomputers. Now, it effectively opposes Chinese supercomputing as a 
whole—a general-purpose technology with innumerable civilian uses. The U.S. government 
has yet to publicly comment on this shift, which could have second- and third-order im -
plications. It might stymie scientific cooperation on climate modeling, for example, or help 
motivate Beijing to restrict American access to some general purpose technology that China 
dominates. The Biden administration should carefully review its semiconductor restrictions 
to ensure that it has fully considered their implications beyond the military sphere.
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
While senior defense leaders should continue to inform civilian regulators of the criti -
cal technologies they believe warrant government controls, other ways of maintaining the 
American military edge over China deserve more time and attention. First, DOD should 
accelerate its efforts to modernize and transform U.S. forces to counter the PLA. This 
work—which includes developing more survivable and cost-effective systems, becoming 
more adept at incorporating private sector innovations, designing new warfighting con -
cepts for near-peer battle, and moving forces into and within the Indo-Pacific—has been 
underway since late in the Obama administration. However, it remains far from complete 
and faces enormous bureaucratic and congressional obstacles.265 The U.S. military edge over 
China will depend more on this task than 
on any other governmental effort, includ -
ing technology restrictions.
Second, the Department of Defense and 
the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) should redouble their efforts to 
shore up cybersecurity and information se-
curity in the military and among defense 
The U.S. military edge over 
the PLA will depend more on the 
modernization and transformation 
of American forces than on 
technology restrictions 
targeting China.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
64 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
contractors specifically. The immediate priority would be to counter the most proven and 
most damaging Chinese intelligence collection techniques—namely, remote hacking, hu -
man agent recruitment, and open-source research. Although the Pentagon in recent years 
has significantly tightened the cybersecurity requirements in its procurement rules, the de-
fense industrial base remains vulnerable.266

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
65 
LIMITING CHINESE NATIONAL 
SECURITY ESPIONAGE
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
The Federal Bureau of Investigation currently describes China’s intelligence activities as “the 
greatest long-term threat to our nation’s information.”267 The bureau has thousands of active 
counterintelligence cases relating to China and opens multiple new cases daily.268 Although 
Beijing’s theft of intellectual property and other economically valuable data remains the 
primary concern, Chinese national security espionage is also harmful. China’s intelligence 
agencies have stolen a significant volume of U.S. military secrets in recent years, includ -
ing aircraft designs.269 They have penetrated U.S. political campaigns to gain insight into 
future American policymaking. 270 And they have compromised America’s own espionage 
networks, reportedly helping to expose and disrupt U.S. intelligence activities in China—a 
top American collection priority—and elsewhere.271
Classified U.S. national security secrets are shielded by a robust system of technological, 
physical, and personnel controls. As a result, China often first seeks out sensitive unclassified 
data that it can later exploit to acquire classified information. In particular, U.S. officials as-
sess that China assembles and analyzes large quantities of Americans’ personal information 
to identify potential targets for intelligence collection or other subterfuge. Some U.S. intel-
ligence officials believe such techniques have enabled Beijing to quickly identify undercover 
personnel from the Central Intelligence Agency around the world and monitor or disrupt 
their activities.272 U.S. agencies also cite the risk that China could use sensitive medical, 
financial, or other personal information to blackmail or co-opt American officials.273

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
66 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
China’s intelligence targeting of American officials has become a major justification for U.S. 
tech restrictions. After all, U.S.-China technological ties provide the Chinese government 
with additional opportunities to harvest Americans’ personal data (just as these ties may 
give Washington ways to collect on Chinese targets). Beijing could, for example, pressure a 
Chinese tech company to share its private data on American users. Chinese companies are 
legally required to comply with such requests, and according to U.S. intelligence officials, 
these companies already help to process bulk data in the possession of Chinese intelligence 
agencies.274 For example, U.S. officials have publicly alleged that Huawei “has the capabil -
ity secretly to access sensitive and personal information in systems it maintains and sells,” 
and that “information from Huawei routers has ultimately ended up in hands that would 
appear to be the state.”275
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
These risks provide some basis for limiting Chinese companies’ presence in U.S. informa -
tion systems. However, restrictive measures may always not be very effective in thwarting 
Chinese theft of Americans’ personal data, for the simple reason that Beijing seems to prefer 
other ways of acquiring that data. When American officials describe China’s most successful 
and damaging bulk collection efforts to date, they usually point to the devastating hack of 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and the compromises of Marriott, Equifax, and 
Anthem. But these were all remote cyber operations; none apparently required any Chinese 
insider access to U.S. systems, companies, or supply chains.276
In fact, sensitive personal information about Americans can be bought outright from U.S. 
or foreign data brokers. U.S. journalists have vividly demonstrated how easy it is to ob -
tain geolocation and other data to identify and track prominent Americans. 277 The U.S. 
military and Intelligence Community reportedly use similar techniques to track foreign 
targets, so there is every reason to believe that Beijing does the same. 278 Then there is sim-
ple data scraping from the open internet, 
which is apparently one of Beijing’s most 
effective espionage techniques. According 
to U.S. prosecutors, China has success -
fully recruited multiple Americans to spy 
for Beijing based on information in these 
targets’ public LinkedIn profiles. William 
Evanina, then director of the National 
Counterintelligence and Security Center, 
said in 2019 that LinkedIn was China’s “ultimate playground for collection.”279 (Although 
LinkedIn announced last year that it would leave the Chinese market, that won’t stop 
Beijing from scouring Americans’ own LinkedIn pages. 280) The major digital espionage 
China’s most successful known bulk 
collection efforts were all remote 
cyber operations. They required 
no insider access to U.S. systems, 
companies, or supply chains.

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
JON BATEMAN 67 
risks, then, stem from pervasive gaps in U.S. cybersecurity and data privacy law, policy, and 
implementation. Chinese tech companies’ presence in American markets and supply chains 
seems like a secondary threat at most.
Before instituting sweeping measures to deny China any access to Americans’ personal data 
on national security grounds, it is also worth considering targeted actions to protect the 
relatively few U.S. citizens with access to classified information. The government has signifi-
cant influence over its own employees and contractors, enabling Washington to discourage 
or even bar them from using Chinese technologies deemed to be high-risk. For example, the 
U.S. military already bans TikT ok from government-owned devices. The military has even 
“urged troops and their dependents to erase the app from personal phones”; if necessary, 
this could become a condition for maintaining a security clearance.281 Protecting undercov-
er agents is a more complicated task. But U.S. spy agencies have already implemented new 
tradecraft and operational security innovations to offset China’s digital counterintelligence 
techniques—the kind of cat-and-mouse game that has occurred throughout the history of 
espionage.282
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
“Personal data” is not a useful or controllable category. Instead, the U.S. Intelligence 
Community should work to identify those categories of personal data that would provide 
the greatest marginal benefits to Chinese spy agencies. Regulatory agencies would then 
consider technology restrictions aimed specifically at this data, while accepting higher levels 
of risk for other types of data.
The Intelligence Community analysis 
would need to consider China’s preexist -
ing intelligence capabilities and its access 
to functionally equivalent personal data on 
Americans. It would also examine the U.S. 
government’s ability to detect and mitigate 
different kinds of personal data theft. If 
Washington can learn of certain Chinese 
data theft quickly and implement effective response plans (for example, by readjusting of -
ficial travel patterns or refreshing the cover identities used by intelligence officers), that 
category of data may need less protection. Finally, the IC should consider the overall sig -
nificance of the U.S. personnel described by the data, and the likely harm to U.S. national 
security from China’s improved ability to track, recruit, or disrupt these people. While 
all Americans’ personal data deserves fundamental protections, extra-stringent restrictions 
should have special justification—just as the IC generates costly cover identities for some 
intelligence officers and not others. For example, data on enlisted U.S. military members in 
Regulators should protect the 
personal data with greatest marginal 
benefits to Chinese spy agencies, 
while accepting higher levels of risk 
for other types of data.

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
68 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
non-sensitive positions would certainly have some intelligence value to China, but it may 
not be critical enough to justify broad-based restrictions on China’s involvement in the U.S. 
tech sector.283
Because U.S. government data is already controlled to varying degrees, the Intelligence 
Community would primarily look to identify sensitive but unclassified personal data held 
by companies and other private parties. For a useful benchmark of the sensitivity of private-
ly held data, the IC could ask whether the data would be considered classified if owned by 
the U.S. government. For example, U.S. national security agencies maintain large caches of 
employee data in unclassified, internet-connected systems (like the Defense T ravel System) 
that are inherently more vulnerable to Chinese hacking than classified systems. 284 The ex-
istence of such systems suggests that Washington believes the practical benefits of internet 
connectivity can often outweigh the risks of Chinese espionage. This is a reasonable calcu -
lation. Regulators should not require private companies to take more onerous precautions 
than U.S. agencies themselves take for equivalent categories of government-held data.
CASE STUDIES
Genetic data. Genetic information is an example of personal data that could warrant re -
strictive measures to prevent Chinese government access. In 2020, the T reasury Department 
issued new regulations empowering CFIUS to review covered transactions that involve 
“sensitive personal data” of more than 1 million individuals. 285 The definition of sensitive 
personal data includes genetic data. Compared to other types of personal information, ge -
netic data is less widely distributed and harder for Beijing to obtain. China could conceiv -
ably use genetic information to identify and physically track U.S. government officials—in-
cluding undercover officers—as they move around the world.286 Because someone’s genetic 
information cannot be changed, a breach would have lifelong consequences and be difficult 
to remediate.287
Geolocation data. In other cases, the “sensitive personal data” regulation seems overly 
broad. Geolocation data is also considered sensitive under the T reasury rule. Yet because 
Americans’ geolocation data can be easily purchased from online data brokers, CFIUS 
screening probably cannot prevent China from acquiring such data. Meanwhile, the pos -
sibility of CFIUS review could cause substantial economic harm to U.S. businesses. There 
are entire industries, including the mobile app ecosystem, where relatively small American 
companies might have geolocation data on 1 million or more individuals. The potential 
need to file voluntary CFIUS notices, and the opaque and time-consuming nature of 
CFIUS review, could chill a great deal of investment activity while doing little to protect 
Americans from Chinese espionage.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
JON BATEMAN 69 
The Grindr episode illustrates both the possibilities and limitations of U.S. efforts to stop 
Chinese companies from acquiring different kinds of personal data on Americans. In 2019, 
CFIUS forced a Chinese company to unwind its purchase of the dating app Grindr. 288 
Grindr has a large American user base, likely including many U.S. officials, who privately 
share information about their HIV status and sexual activities with the app. Such infor -
mation has great value for Chinese intelligence targeters, will remain relevant to them for 
decades, and cannot be found in many other places online. The CFIUS action therefore 
made sense, because it blocked one of China’s clearest paths to acquiring a unique cache 
of personal data with clear national security value. On the other hand, the forced divest -
ment probably did little to secure other types of personal data, such as geolocation. A 2021 
Norwegian government report revealed that Grindr’s new American owners routinely share 
users’ “IP address, GPS location, age, and gender,” though not sexual or health informa -
tion, “with a very large number of third parties.”289 It would be a trivial task for the Chinese 
government to get similar information from data brokers.
Stayntouch. T rump’s 2020 executive order on Stayntouch provides another cautionary 
case study. Circumventing the normal CFIUS process, T rump required a Chinese company 
to divest from Stayntouch, a cloud-based service that helps hotels manage their proper -
ties.290 Stayntouch has access to data on hotel guests, and its software can even be used to 
access guest rooms. This likely raised the specter of China using Stayntouch software to 
gain historical or real-time knowledge of U.S. government officials’ travels, a clear counter-
intelligence threat. That said, Stayntouch is used by only 500 hotels worldwide; American 
officials might be able simply to avoid these hotels. 291 By comparison, Marriott alone has 
7,642 properties.292 Without aid of any insider access, Chinese hackers had persistent access 
to Marriott’s Starwood network for four years and stole data on 500 million guests, includ-
ing reservation and travel information as well as personal data such as passport numbers.293
The contrast between Stayntouch and Marriott shows the limits of CFIUS as a tool for pro-
tecting Americans’ personal data. While a small number of high-value data sources can be 
protected through China-focused restrictions like investment screening, most other kinds 
of personal data cannot feasibly be secured this way. Unfortunately, U.S. officials have not 
always made such distinctions. The T rump administration, in particular, often lumped all 
types of personal data together regardless of sensitivity, uniqueness, or controllability. Then 
secretary of state Mike Pompeo in 2020 described a “project of real scale” in which “we are 
now evaluating each instance where we believe that U.S. citizens’ data . . . crosses Chinese 
technology.”294
App bans. In T rump’s last days as president, he signed an executive order banning Alipay, 
WeChat Pay, and six other Chinese apps. Rather than point to specific kinds of data these 
apps collected from Americans, T rump described a generalized threat of “Chinese connect-
ed software applications” that can “[access] personal electronic devices such as smartphones, 
tablets, and computers”—in other words, nearly all Chinese software. And he cited, as a

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
70 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
favorable precedent, India’s recent ban of “more than 200 Chinese connected software ap-
plications throughout the country”— a blunderbuss barrage from New Delhi that seemed 
motivated more by a desire to retaliate for recent border skirmishes than by any careful, 
app-specific security review.295
Pompeo and T rump are no longer in office, and Biden has rescinded the app bans. But the 
fact that such bans were even attempted, and the limitless logic used to justify them, has 
already sent a chilling message to the global software industry. Meanwhile, loose talk about 
“Americans’ data” can still be heard across the political spectrum. Evanina, a former career 
professional, testified last year that approximately “80 percent of American adults have had 
all of their personal data stolen by the [Chinese Communist Party], and the other 20 percent 
most of their personal data”—a head-scratchingly vague and implausible claim that has 
nevertheless become widely quoted.296
Video games. Under Biden, CFIUS has reportedly continued its investigation of T encent’s 
ownership stakes in Riot Games and Epic, two video game developers.297 A former civil ser-
vant in charge of CFIUS reviews under Obama and T rump explained these investigations 
to Bloomberg: “When you’re talking about massive amounts of data, there’s probably some-
thing for the committee to look at.” He went on to add that: “The question then becomes[:] 
is the risk high enough that it actually warrants forcing deals apart.” 298 In other words, a 
large universe of activities must be reviewed, with fine policy distinctions being made after 
the fact, behind the scenes, on a case-by-case basis. This strategy, typical of the American 
national security establishment, risks casting a chill over huge swaths of commercial trans -
actions. A more targeted and rigorous approach is needed.
In June 2021, Biden signed an executive order on “Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data 
from Foreign Adversaries.”299 This order singles out the threat from China and tasks agen -
cies with making “recommendations to protect against harm from the unrestricted sale of, 
transfer of, or access to United States persons’ sensitive data, including personally identifi -
able information, personal health information, and genetic information, and harm from 
access to large data repositories by persons owned or controlled by, or subject to the juris -
diction or direction of, a foreign adversary.” A formal process for grappling with these prob-
lems is a welcome improvement on the previous, ad hoc approach. But the ultimate value 
of this process will depend on whether key terms from Biden’s order can be given more 
specific, tightly focused definitions. “Sensitive data,” “personally identifiable information,” 
and “large data repositories” are vague concepts that could easily lead to overreaching gov-
ernmental controls. These concepts should be refined to include only the highest-priority 
data, as outlined above.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
JON BATEMAN 71 
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
The U.S. government has many opportunities to protect Americans’ personal data from 
Chinese intelligence, beyond imposing restrictive measures aimed specifically at China. 
Above all, Congress should establish national data privacy and cybersecurity standards. 
Many experts have called for federal legislation to replace the weak smattering of sector-
specific and state-level rules.300 With new mega-breaches and data abuses routinely coming 
to light, it is clear that many U.S. companies lack adequate incentives to protect Americans’ 
private information. National cybersecurity and data privacy standards would be adversary-
agnostic, aiming to stop any malicious actor from wrongfully purchasing or stealing sensitive 
personal data. By addressing the underly -
ing problem—that Americans’ personal 
data is very easy to obtain—such standards 
would do more to thwart Beijing’s intelli -
gence collection than most China-centric 
measures.
The U.S. government can also take spe -
cific precautions to protect its own offi -
cials. While all Americans have an interest 
in preventing Beijing from accessing their 
personal data, the most acute national security threat is Chinese intelligence targeting those 
with classified information—a much narrower category. In response to this growing threat, 
U.S. agencies have significantly increased their China-related counterintelligence activities. 
Still, the scope of the problem described by U.S. officials calls for even more resources. 
The government should step up its monitoring and disruption of Chinese intelligence op -
erations, provide more frequent and detailed defensive counterintelligence briefings, and 
hand down new guidance or restrictions for officials’ use of higher-risk online spaces like 
LinkedIn, among other possibilities. Targeted counterintelligence programs, while often 
not sufficient on their own, can help advance U.S. policy objectives without many of the 
costs and risks that come with broad-based technology restrictions.
National cybersecurity and data 
privacy standards, although 
adversary-agnostic, would do more 
to thwart Beijing’s intelligence 
collection than most China- 
centric measures.

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
73 
PREVENTING CHINESE SABOTAGE 
IN A CRISIS
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
The Biden and T rump administrations both have warned that China could sabotage criti-
cal U.S. systems during a bilateral crisis and that technological interdependence heightens 
this risk.301 Beijing has the legal and political tools to compel private Chinese companies 
to offer up any privileged access they may have to software or hardware systems used in the 
United States. Such access could facilitate actual attacks, as well as threats (either explicit 
or implicit), against U.S. infrastructure. During peacetime, China’s interest in stable com-
mercial and diplomatic relations generally outweighs any benefits of digital sabotage or 
saber-rattling. But in extreme circumstances, like the cusp of war, China would have strong 
reason to consider all its options. There are two broad scenarios.
First, China could attempt a counter -
force operation to paralyze the U.S. mili-
tary and prevent American units from 
responding to a bilateral crisis. For exam-
ple, Beijing might want to stop key U.S. 
military assets from promptly reinforcing 
or resupplying American or allied forces 
abroad. The scenario has parallels with 
Japan’s 1941 surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, which sought to buy time for T okyo to act 
freely in the Pacific.302 In a modern digital version of such an attack, China could try to sub-
vert unclassified and/or commercially operated infrastructure that the U.S. military relies 
In extreme circumstances, Beijing 
would consider digital sabotage 
to paralyze the U.S. military or 
dissuade American leaders from 
confronting China forcefully.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
74 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
on—such as core telecommunications systems, private logistics companies, off-base electric 
power sources, undersea cables, commercial satellites, and cloud services.
Second, Beijing could carry out a countervalue operation that harms U.S. civilians, hoping 
to demoralize them and thereby dissuade American political leaders from confronting China 
forcefully. This might involve disruptions of the U.S. power grid, financial sector, health -
care systems, emergency services, telecommunications, or transportation networks. Britain 
briefly tried (and soon abandoned) a countervalue strategy at the outset of World War I, 
seeking to exploit its centrality in international communications and financial networks to 
isolate the German economy and force Berlin to quickly sue for peace.303 A Chinese version 
of this gambit could cause significant blowback—harming the Chinese economy and turn-
ing Chinese tech companies into international pariahs, among other consequences. But in 
a major crisis, Beijing might discount or accept this risk, seeing digital subversion as less 
dangerous and provocative than more overt forms of disruption.
The danger posed by these scenarios is difficult to assess. On the one hand, they are pre -
mised on a hypothetical, high-stakes crisis that may never come to pass. China’s calculus for 
when and how to exploit its companies’ access to adversary systems is unknown; Beijing’s 
concern for Chinese firms’ commercial reputations may create a state of deterrence. And 
the ultimate impact of any Chinese sabotage is uncertain, in part because U.S. critical infra-
structure systems are so complicated and decentralized. On the other hand, the long-term 
risk of such a crisis seems to be trending upward as bilateral relations deteriorate. And all 
governments, including the United States, are willing to exploit domestic companies for 
national security purposes under various circumstances. Finally, a crisis is no time to test the 
consequences of critical U.S. system outages.
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
U.S. restrictive measures can help to reduce the risks of actual or threatened Chinese tech-
nological sabotage. But such measures also have practical limits. Understanding these limits 
can help to focus U.S. action on the most important areas while preventing futile and costly 
overreach elsewhere.
T o begin with, Beijing’s counterforce and countervalue options in a crisis do not all require 
insider access to U.S. systems. According to the U.S. Intelligence Community, “China can 
launch cyber attacks that, at a minimum, can cause localized, temporary disruptions to crit-
ical infrastructure within the United States.”304 Such cyber attacks most frequently involve 
remote hacking; built-in backdoors are rare. In extremis, China could also do things like 
physically cutting undersea cables (including those that are not operated by or connected 
to China), disrupting U.S. satellites (through physical or cyber means that do not require

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
JON BATEMAN 75 
supply chain access), or ordering intelligence agents or co-optees inside the United States to 
carry out physical sabotage of critical infrastructure (whether Chinese-made or otherwise). 
Some of these actions are potentially deniable. In other words, U.S. tech restrictions can 
curb a few of China’s sabotage options, but it isn’t clear that PLA military planners need or 
prefer those particular options.
T echnology controls also cannot eliminate China’s low-tech or no-tech sources of leverage 
over the United States. During peacetime, Beijing’s demonstrated coercive tool kit includes 
halting key exports, imports, and people-to-people exchanges in an effort to inflict eco -
nomic damage.305 Such actions do not necessarily target technology industries or rely on 
technological links. Instead, China has previously targeted sectors (including agriculture, 
tourism, and education) where it can impose asymmetric economic costs and maximize 
political pressure on a rival country’s government. Again, more extreme options also exist. 
At the threshold of war, Beijing could choose to seize U.S.-owned assets in China or carry 
out mass arrests of American citizens. Such leverage points are inherent to a U.S.-China 
relationship; they cannot be eliminated so long as the two countries do business.
The fact is that any bilateral relationship provides both countries with some access to 
and influence over the other. Unless the United States seeks a Cold War–style separa -
tion from China, Beijing will retain significant avenues for coercion and disruption. Of 
course, Washington wants to design a relationship that maximizes U.S. leverage over China 
while minimizing Chinese leverage over 
America. This is a fine aspiration in the -
ory, but often unattainable in practice, 
especially in the long run. One-sided 
dynamics will become harder to sustain 
over time as China continues to grow in 
economic heft and international influ -
ence relative to the United States.306
Finally, potential Chinese sabotage 
should be placed in the context of other 
threats to U.S. infrastructure. 307 While American policymakers worry about what Beijing 
might do in future crises, a diverse array of non-Chinese actors have already caused actual 
disruptions to U.S. infrastructure during peacetime, or demonstrated the capability to do 
so. In 2021, a criminal ransomware attack led to the lengthy shutdown of America’s largest 
petroleum pipeline, helping trigger fuel shortages throughout the East Coast. 308 The year 
prior, a domestic suicide bombing near an AT&T facility in Nashville caused prolonged 
telecommunications outages across multiple states. 309 Russia has twice caused power out -
ages in Ukraine, and in 2014 it emerged that unknown cyber actors had severely damaged 
a German steel mill.310
Any bilateral relationship provides 
both countries with some influence 
over the other. Barring a Cold War–
style separation, Beijing will retain 
significant avenues for coercion 
and disruption.

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
76 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
The biggest threat to critical infrastructure, arguably, comes from non-intentional disrup -
tions. Episodes like the T exas freeze (2021), Hurricane Maria (2017), and the Northeast 
blackout (2003) illustrate a basic problem: First, inadequate investments in infrastructure 
capacity, maintenance, and resilience create systemic fragility. Then, semi-random shocks—
such as weather events, demand surges, equipment malfunctions, or counterfeit parts—de-
stabilize the system and lead to large-scale outages. 311 Non-intentional infrastructure fail -
ures have been far more frequent and damaging than intentional wrongdoing by any actor. 
Non-intentional disruptions might even happen to coincide with an international crisis and 
thereby hamper U.S. military forces, although such a convergence is unlikely.
Unfortunately, China-focused restrictions can sometimes divert resources from broader ef-
forts to shore up U.S. critical infrastructure against all hazards. Consider a hypothetical 
federal mandate to remove all Chinese equipment from the electrical grid. T o pay for this 
expensive initiative, utilities would need to defer other planned investments in security and 
resilience, raise rates on consumers and businesses, or secure large government subsidies. 
Congress recently bumbled through a very similar situation. In March 2020, it passed a law 
requiring U.S. telecoms to “remove and replace” Huawei and ZTE equipment due to na -
tional security concerns.312 Small rural carriers warned that this unfunded mandate would 
“devastate” them financially. Congress eventually provided subsidies to offset carriers’ costs, 
but it took nine months and a fortuitous legislative vehicle—the $900 billion COVID-19 
relief package—to do so. 313 Meanwhile the industry was forced to endure what one top 
lobbyist described as a lengthy “cliffhanger,” during which two small carriers shut down.314
T o be sure, U.S. policymakers cannot ignore the risk of China sabotaging American systems 
in a crisis. The risk is real, and technological interdependence provides Beijing with addi -
tional means (though perhaps lower motivation) to subvert U.S. infrastructure. Washington 
should take targeted, cost-effective actions to address the problem. But restrictive measures 
should focus on the highest-risk areas, where Chinese technological influence within the 
United States could grant Beijing a particularly effective capability to paralyze key U.S. 
forces or coerce U.S. political leadership at a critical moment. Even then, technology con -
trols should be aligned with a comprehensive national plan to protect U.S. critical infra -
structure from all digital and physical hazards.
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
The U.S. government should identify the most consequential Chinese sabotage scenarios, 
map the specific technological dependencies that would enable them, and design targeted 
controls to curb such risks.
The Department of Defense should take the lead on counterforce analysis. Approved de -
fense planning scenarios can serve as the starting point. For each planning scenario, DOD

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
JON BATEMAN 77 
could list the individual U.S. military assets or networks essential to achieving mission ob-
jectives, perhaps based on Time-Phased Force Deployment Data.315 It could then determine 
where these military assets have critical dependencies on unclassified and/or commercial 
U.S. networks. Finally, DOD could evaluate such networks for the presence of Chinese-
origin software or hardware that Beijing could exploit to alter military outcomes. The acid 
test would be whether Chinese technological sabotage could significantly increase the likeli-
hood of U.S. mission failure.
While DOD is leading the counterforce analysis, DHS should assess countervalue sabo -
tage. T o build a set of scenarios, DHS might start with existing frameworks such as the 
National Critical Functions—a list of fifty-five government and private sector activities “so 
vital to the United States that their disruption, corruption, or dysfunction would have a 
debilitating effect on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, 
or any combination thereof.”316 These functions include such elemental tasks as “Manage 
Hazardous Materials,” “Generate Electricity,” and “Provide Positioning, Navigation, and 
Timing Services.” DHS could survey major stakeholders for each function to identify 
Chinese commercial presence in the supply chain that could be exploited for disruptive 
purposes. This could leverage and complement the department’s ongoing Systemic Cyber 
Risk Reduction Venture, which has a similar purpose but is not China-specific.317
DHS should set a high threshold of criticality before it recommends that regulators impose 
new China-related technology controls. It might, for example, consider only those sabotage 
scenarios that could plausibly exert a coercive effect on U.S. political leadership during 
a crisis. This would likely involve mass casualties and/or mass evacuations. As a point of 
comparison, the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s National Threat and Hazard 
Identification and Risk Assessment provides a list of seven scenarios with that level of sever-
ity, including earthquakes, hurricanes, space weather events, and concurrent natural disas-
ters.318 T o justify new government technology controls, a Chinese countervalue sabotage 
scenario might need to threaten damage on the same order of magnitude.
Any Chinese sabotage scenario should be vetted for plausibility. The Intelligence Community 
could provide an independent assessment that considers China’s technology subversion capa-
bilities, military doctrines, and national leadership intentions during the expected lifecycle of 
the U.S. systems at issue. In assessing China’s plans and intentions, intelligence analysts should 
consider what other counterforce or countervalue options Beijing may have in a crisis, and 
whether Chinese leaders may be deterred by the risks of economic blowback or U.S. reprisals.
CASE STUDIES
Bulk power. The T rump administration’s regulation of bulk power systems was a good 
example of tailored tech restrictions designed to thwart Chinese sabotage. In May 2020,

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
78 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
T rump signed an executive order restricting usage of bulk power equipment sourced from 
“foreign adversary” countries such as China. 319 Bulk power systems are ideal targets for 
sabotage because their failure can cause massive electricity outages that cannot easily be 
remediated. Large power transformers, for example, can take more than twenty months 
to replace.320 These transformers are increasingly—though not exclusively—sourced from 
China and contain smart components potentially susceptible to manipulation.321
T rump’s action focused specifically on counterforce scenarios. The administration assessed 
that the PLA “is equipped and actively planning to undermine” the bulk power system and 
that “such attacks are most likely during crises abroad where Chinese military planning en-
visions early cyber attacks against the electric power grids . . . in the U.S. to prevent the de-
ployment of military forces and to incur domestic turmoil.” Accordingly, the Department 
of Energy applied the ban on Chinese bulk power equipment only to “Defense Critical 
Electric Infrastructure”—that is, civilian-
owned or -operated power infrastructure 
serving certain military facilities designated 
by DOD as “critical to the defense of the 
United States.”322
The Department of Energy was right to 
impose this restriction on a select subset of 
highly critical, difficult-to-replace equip -
ment that directly supports military operations. However, Biden has rescinded the new 
rule and asked the Energy Department to consider what, if anything, should replace it. 323 
The department invited public comment on potential approaches, including whether it 
should issue a new, even broader ban to cover countervalue scenarios and other types of 
power infrastructure. Any such expansion should remain focused on a very high threshold 
of sabotage impact and be rooted in rigorous cost-benefit analysis.
ICTS supply chain security rule. Not every U.S. action aimed at preventing Chinese 
technological sabotage has been so targeted. A particularly troubling case is the Commerce 
Department’s new rule on ICTS supply chain security, which was first developed by the 
T rump administration, then allowed by Biden to come into effect in March 2021. Like the 
bulk power regulation, this rule warns that China and other foreign adversaries could sabo-
tage the U.S. supply chain—“fully or partially shutting down critical networks or functions 
at key times,” among many other cited dangers. 324 But the ICTS supply chain rule is far 
more sweeping in its scope and implications.
The ICTS rule allows the Commerce Department to review and ban virtually any China-
sourced technology that is widely used in the United States. The potential scope of review 
includes—but is not limited to—all software (including mobile apps and web apps), internet 
hosting services, home networking devices, and Internet of Things devices used by or process-
The Department of Energy was 
right to bar China from supplying 
highly critical, difficult-to-replace 
bulk power equipment that directly 
supports military operations.

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
JON BATEMAN 79 
ing data on more than 1 million Americans.325 Considering the U.S. population and the scale 
of many digital markets, this is a low threshold. A transaction need not have any connection 
to critical infrastructure sectors or critical national functions to trigger review. The law firm 
Morrison & Foerster observed that “almost any ICTS-related activity in the United States 
connected to China is now subject to regulatory review by the U.S. government.”326
Covered transactions are not automatically banned. Instead, the rule establishes a review 
system analogous to CFIUS. The Department of Commerce, in consultation with other 
agencies, will judge each transaction using a wide range of factors, including the likelihood 
and severity of potential harms and the efficacy of mitigation options, to determine whether 
“undue or unacceptable risks” exist. The publicly stated decisionmaking criteria are quite 
vague. Biden and the Commerce Department have taken laudable initial steps to clarify and 
refine these criteria, but it remains to be seen what implementation will actually look like. 
If Commerce follows the standard model of U.S. national security regulation (exemplified 
by CFIUS), it will either develop a more detailed list of internal criteria, or else make deci-
sions on an ad hoc basis. 327 Both options would leave outside stakeholders—such as U.S. 
businesses—in the dark.
U.S. national security officials and political leaders traditionally prefer opaque regulatory 
processes for several reasons. By declining to commit publicly (or sometimes even privately) 
to a detailed and predictable decision framework, they seek to maximize the U.S. govern -
ment’s enforcement discretion. The all-encompassing ICTS supply chain rule means that 
Washington can adjust its interpretation from day to day based on its evolving needs and 
beliefs. T rump’s Commerce Department also explained that clearer public criteria “would 
[have] allow[ed] foreign adversaries to pinpoint certain types of ICTS T ransactions that 
would more easily escape Departmental 
oversight and, therefore, threaten U.S. na-
tional security.”
But too much discretion comes with costs 
of its own, especially when a large portion of 
the U.S. digital economy and global tech -
nology supply chain is at stake. Without 
more clarity and predictability, some U.S. 
businesses will simply choose to avoid China-related technology transactions, including 
many that pose little national security risk and are economically beneficial. Likewise, global 
investors will pull back support from some projects—many of them benign—whose viabil-
ity depends on a long-term U.S.-China technology supply chain.328 The Biden administra-
tion should substantially narrow the ICTS supply chain rule, instituting a clear and high 
threshold for technology bans and declaring specific safe harbors for noncritical technology 
areas. It should also continue working to develop and publicize a more detailed and explicit 
set of enforcement criteria, along the lines suggested throughout this report.
Biden should substantially narrow 
the ICTS rule, instituting a clear 
and high threshold for technology 
bans and declaring specific safe 
harbors for noncritical tech areas.

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
80 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
In its current form, the ICTS supply chain rule is an invitation for overuse—if not by this 
administration, then by a future one. For example, restrictionist politicians and national 
security analysts have long campaigned for broad-based bans on computers, printers, and 
other devices sold by the Chinese companies Lenovo and Lexmark. The proposed bans 
would apply even in lower-risk settings, like noncritical state and local government offic -
es.329 Banning these cheap IT commodities would make it harder for cash-strapped public 
entities to address more pressing cybersecurity concerns, such as ransomware. Yet the ICTS 
supply chain rule provides a clear regulatory basis for such a ban, setting the stage for a 
concerted lobbying push in the future.
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
The U.S. government has numerous options for directly bolstering the cybersecurity and 
resilience of critical military and civilian systems, which would mitigate not only the risk of 
Chinese sabotage but also other serious threats, like weather-related outages. With the elec-
trical grid, for example, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission could apply stronger 
mandatory cybersecurity standards to a larger number of entities and enforce them more 
vigorously.330 The Department of Energy could establish a strategic reserve of large power 
transformers.331 Congress could allocate federal money to shore up grid vulnerabilities. 332 
Investments in disaster recovery capabilities at the federal, state, and local levels would also 
help mitigate the economic and societal damage caused by infrastructure outages once they 
occur. Any of these efforts might be expensive, so the federal government could focus first 
on a small subset of assets, like Defense Critical Electric Infrastructure, that face greatest 
risk from Chinese sabotage.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
81 
LIMITING CHINESE INFLUENCE 
OPERATIONS
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
U.S. officials have become increasingly vocal in warning of Chinese government efforts 
to influence American politics and society. 333 Several trends underlie this concern. First, 
Russia’s interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election brought much greater attention 
to the overall threat of foreign influence. Subsequent events, particularly the COVID-19 
“infodemic” and the U.S. Capitol insurrection, further highlighted the fragility of America’s 
political-informational ecosystem and its susceptibility to damaging manipulation.
At the same time, a more assertive China has increasingly sought to shape political narra -
tives beyond its borders, especially on China-related issues. Much of this activity is overt—
including Beijing’s “wolf warrior diplomacy,” its nationalistic state-sponsored media, and 
its punishment of foreign companies whose speech offends the Chinese Communist Party. 
But some efforts are covert—ranging from traditional influence (for example, cultivating 
agents within foreign political circles) to modern digital techniques (for example, fabricat -
ing armies of fake social media accounts that harass and vilify dissidents).334
China’s foreign influence efforts have often focused closer to home, on targets such as 
Taiwan and Australia.335 Nevertheless, in 2021 the U.S. Intelligence Community assessed 
that “Beijing has been intensifying efforts to shape the political environment in the United 
States to promote its policy preferences, mold public discourse, pressure political figures 
whom Beijing believes oppose its interests, and muffle criticism of China on such issues 
as religious freedom and the suppression of democracy in Hong Kong.” 336 According to

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
82 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
the IC, China “considered but did not deploy influence efforts intended to change the 
outcome of the [2020] US presidential election.”337 Beijing apparently judged that the risks 
outweighed the benefits. This calculus may well change in the future, particularly if U.S.-
China relations continue to deteriorate.
U.S. policymakers worry that Beijing could 
pressure the makers of popular Chinese 
apps like TikT ok or WeChat to support 
covert influence campaigns that target 
Americans. Such a campaign might involve 
artificially promoting and/or suppressing 
certain content, perhaps leveraging the 
apps’ capability to microtarget specific au -
diences. WeChat—which is popular among the global Chinese diaspora—already censors 
topics such as the Tiananmen Square massacre and the Falun Gong religious movement.338 
TikT ok has acknowledged doing the same, but claims that it stopped in 2019.339
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
In theory, these concerns could justify major U.S. government restrictive measures such as app 
bans. In practice, however, there are good reasons for U.S. policymakers to think twice. T o 
begin with, social media–based influence operations by China and other foreign governments 
may not actually be very effective. Researchers have struggled to find strong evidence that such 
operations can measurably alter their targets’ beliefs and actions over time. A meta-analysis 
by Princeton University found only one high-quality empirical study on the question.340 That 
study examined efforts by Russia’s Internet Research Agency during the 2016 U.S. presiden-
tial election and found no effect on American T witter users’ political beliefs.
Although future research may identify stronger causal effects, it is worth keeping in mind 
the difficulties of large-scale public persuasion. T o swing a U.S. presidential election, for ex-
ample, Chinese influence actors would need to sway the small number of persuadable vot-
ers, or alter the turnout of voters, in battleground states. But Beijing would face stiff compe-
tition along the way. A Chinese influence campaign would be operating amid a cacophony 
of other voices—including political candidates and parties, community leaders, activists, 
traditional media commentary, and authentic citizen views—that dominate online as well 
as TV , radio, print, and word-of-mouth discourse. Domestic voices tend to have far more 
resources (billions of dollars are spent during a presidential election cycle), greater political 
sophistication, and thicker networks than even the most well-crafted foreign personas.
Just as domestic actors are the predominant voices in American politics, domestic players 
are also the main sources and amplifiers of political disinformation. Before TikT ok entered 
U.S. policymakers worry that 
Beijing could pressure the makers of 
popular Chinese apps like TikTok or 
WeChat to support covert influence 
campaigns that target Americans.

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
JON BATEMAN 83 
the American market, U.S.-based platforms like Facebook, T witter, and YouT ube already 
provided fertile ground for false, polarizing, and destructive political discourse. While these 
platforms have taken many actions to address influence operations, the problem seems to 
be growing even faster. 341 Fundamentally, user-generated content is produced on a scale 
that overwhelms existing content moderation tools, and platforms lack the financial and 
political incentives to undertake wholesale product redesigns to reduce the spread of harm-
ful content. Market power is one part of the problem. The size of some major platforms 
helps to insulate them from pressure by users, advertisers, political leaders, activists, and 
employees to take stronger action against influence operations and other damaging content.
In this context, competitive pressure from Chinese apps like TikT ok may have beneficial 
effects. TikT ok is the most significant competitive threat to emerge in the American social 
media landscape in years. As such, its presence might help spur U.S.-based platforms to take 
stronger action against disinformation and other influence operations to burnish their repu-
tations among advertisers, users, and outside stakeholders. Indeed, American activists and 
NGOs concerned about harmful online content have begun to explicitly compare TikT ok’s 
efforts against those of U.S.-based platforms. 342 This suggests that TikT ok’s presence has 
helped to intensify a reputational contest 
among platforms that could, if combined 
with regulatory and other pressure, raise 
the bar for responsible policies and prac -
tices by all players.
A sound U.S. policy on Chinese influ -
ence operations would place companies 
like TikT ok in the context of the larger 
American political-informational ecosys -
tem. Seen in that light, Chinese tech companies play a limited and, perhaps, not entirely 
harmful role. Restrictive measures to counter Chinese influence operations should therefore 
be carefully vetted and focus on the highest-impact, most plausible threats.
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
Washington has a variety of tools to combat Chinese influence operations, but it should re-
serve technology restrictions such as app bans for the most serious risks. These would include 
the risk that China successfully alters a national election outcome or greatly reduces public 
confidence in an election. Potential influence operations with life-and-death consequences, 
such as those that markedly increase vaccine hesitancy during a pandemic, would also justify 
strong controls. However, long-term influence operations on less sensitive topics can often 
be managed in other ways. The bulk of Chinese influence activity in the United States seems 
aimed at shaping Americans’ general views of China and China-related policy.343 These slow-
Slow-rolling efforts to shape 
Americans’ general views of China 
and China-related policy are more 
readily detected and countered 
without resort to government 
tech controls.

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
84 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
rolling persuasion campaigns, while troubling, are no emergency. They are more readily 
detected and countered without resort to government controls.
It is unclear whether China currently has the ability to achieve any of the most dangerous 
influence outcomes, such as swinging an election. The U.S. government should conduct 
a careful, fact-based assessment to guide its use of technology controls. The Intelligence 
Community can help by estimating the Chinese government’s capability and willingness to 
subvert Chinese commercial technology to influence Americans. But a China-focused intel-
ligence assessment is only part of what policymakers would need. U.S. policymakers must 
also understand the American political and societal factors that would determine whether 
Chinese influence operations ultimately succeed or fail. This analysis would be crucial to 
properly size up the threat and weigh policy responses, yet the Intelligence Community and 
other government agencies lack the authority and expertise to conduct such an assessment.
T o supplement the IC’s analysis, the president could convene an outside advisory group 
of political scientists, communications experts, influence operations researchers, and tech -
nologists, perhaps under the aegis of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine. This panel would examine the U.S. domestic environment’s susceptibility to 
Chinese digital influence operations. For example, it might consider whether and how such 
operations could effectively persuade key voting constituencies or influence their turnout, 
considering factors like the partisan balance in swing states and the responsiveness of vari -
ous constituencies to targeted digital campaigns. A government-sponsored analysis of this 
kind would need to be carefully designed to prevent real and perceived impingements on 
Americans’ civil liberties.344
CASE STUDIES
TikT ok. The most significant U.S. restrictions aimed at thwarting Chinese influence opera-
tions were T rump’s executive orders attempting to ban TikT ok and force its sale. These or-
ders—which have never been implemented—were not justified based on publicly available 
evidence about influence threats. While T rump vaguely claimed that TikT ok could “be used 
for disinformation campaigns that benefit the Chinese Communist Party,” his administra-
tion offered no analysis of how effective these campaigns might be.345
Biden rescinded the TikT ok ban. He replaced it with a new mechanism, the Commerce 
Department’s ICTS supply chain security rule, to evaluate any Chinese software and hard-
ware popularly used in the United States. Later, he published “a criteria-based decision 
framework” to help guide the Commerce Department’s review of so-called “connected 
software applications” such as TikT ok.346 However, officials have not publicly confirmed 
whether TikT ok is currently being investigated under the ICTS process.347

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
JON BATEMAN 85 
The Department of Commerce should carry out such a review, if it has not already started 
one. Biden’s criteria offer a helpful starting point but should be refined to more specifically 
assess TikT ok’s threat as a medium for Chinese influence operations. Outside experts should 
draw on the best data and science to answer key questions including: whether TikT ok’s user 
base contains a large number of swing state voters; whether political content on TikT ok 
content appears highly influential with a critical mass of those voters; whether corporate 
firewalls cannot reliably prevent Beijing from hijacking the platform in an undetected way 
during the course of an election; and whether the threat of Chinese influence operations via 
TikT ok outweighs any benefits that TikT ok may have on U.S. political discourse, including 
from competitive pressures on American tech platforms.
Long-term influence. Beyond TikT ok, many proposals to limit Chinese influence ca -
pabilities in the United States do not focus on high-consequence, time-critical processes 
like elections. Instead, there is often worry that Beijing may gradually sway Americans’ 
views about China-related policies. Confucius Institutes (Chinese public diplomacy initia-
tives embedded in U.S. universities) are frequent bogeymen, as is Chinese influence over 
U.S. entertainment sectors, like filmmaking and sports. CFIUS is reportedly in talks with 
Chinese tech giant T encent about its ownership stakes in major U.S. video game develop-
ers.348 At some point, relationships between Chinese tech companies and U.S. streaming 
platforms—like Netflix-Baidu and HBO-T encent—will likely come under scrutiny. But 
none of these arrangements seem to represent the kind of urgent influence threat that justi-
fies forceful U.S. government controls.
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
While the U.S. government should continue to monitor and disrupt Chinese influence 
activities, its top priority must be restoring health to America’s domestic information eco -
system. Washington must recognize that disinformation flourishes due to deep-seated and 
largely homegrown trends—in American politics, society, economy, and law—that have 
co-evolved over decades and become mutually reinforcing. Key factors include the TV 
and online media landscape (segmenting 
Americans into ideological echo cham -
bers), social media business models (maxi-
mizing user engagement and enabling mi -
crotargeting), and political party dynamics 
(such as geographic sorting, gerrymander -
ing, and primary election rules). Large-
scale progress in combating disinformation 
would require profound national reforms 
in these and other arenas. The goal would 
The top priority must be restoring 
health to America’s domestic 
information ecosystem. This would 
disincentivize the production, 
amplification, and consumption of 
disinformation from all sources—
not just China.

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
86 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
be to disincentivize the production, amplification, and consumption of disinformation 
from all sources—not just China.
T rue reform would be an extremely daunting task. The federal government’s role in combat-
ing disinformation is poorly defined and heavily constrained by laws, norms, and political 
obstacles. Its tools are often tactical in nature (like sanctions) and oriented toward for -
eign threats (as with the Foreign Agents Registration Act). Federal overreach could actually 
worsen political distrust or create harmful precedents that future administrations could 
abuse. In fact, some of the most dangerous disinformers have been federal officeholders and 
candidates.
That said, experts have proposed a raft of policy ideas that the U.S. government could 
either implement or help to coordinate. These include strengthening regulation of online 
platforms; reforming campaign finance, election advertising, and redistricting laws; fund -
ing media literacy education; creating new public-private grant programs for journalists; 
and funding and facilitating basic research on influence operations. 349 Such policies have 
not been rigorously tested. In fact, there is very little empirical evidence about the impacts 
of influence operations or the effectiveness of countermeasures.350 Still, improving the U.S. 
domestic information environment would be much more effective in curbing Beijing’s in -
fluence operations than any China-specific measures. Moreover, these policies would help 
to address domestic disinformation, a far more serious problem.

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
87 
DENYING SUPPORT FOR CHINESE AND 
CHINA-ENABLED AUTHORITARIANISM 
AND REPRESSION
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
T echnology has enabled disturbing escalations and expansions of China’s authoritarian and 
repressive policies, prompting American policymakers to step up U.S. tech restrictions in 
response. Washington’s main concerns are twofold.
First, Beijing has spent years pioneering 
wholly new kinds of mass digital surveil -
lance and censorship within China—in -
cluding the Great Firewall, social credit 
systems, and ubiquitous AI-powered digi -
tal camera networks, to name just a few 
well-known examples. These systems are 
more fragmented and spottier than some -
times portrayed. Nevertheless, China’s 
techno-authoritarian innovations have managed to expand the modern frontiers of social 
control, alarming Americans concerned with Chinese human rights and civic freedoms. 351 
In particular, tech has helped to power Beijing’s worst recent abuses, such as the ongoing 
campaign to marginalize Uyghurs and eliminate their culture, which Washington rightly 
calls genocide and crimes against humanity. 352 Mass facial recognition and biometric col -
lection have become tools of ethnic profiling against Uyghurs, while Chinese drones have 
helped Xinjiang security forces to manage mass detention operations.
China’s techno-authoritarian 
systems, while more fragmented 
and spottier than sometimes 
portrayed, have nevertheless 
expanded the modern frontiers 
of social control.

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
88 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Second, many U.S. policymakers believe that Beijing is proactively exporting this techno-
authoritarian model to other countries. 353 For example, Chinese digital surveillance and 
censorship systems have been sold to repressive regimes like Zimbabwe and Venezuela, with 
the latter receiving “a commercialized version of China’s ‘Great Firewall.’” 354 Washington 
fears that a “China model” of techno-authoritarianism will not only spread among authori-
tarian countries, but may also influence hybrid regimes and illiberal democracies, exacerbat-
ing and entrenching the global democratic recession.
Such an outcome would threaten U.S. interests (as well as American values), because 
Washington derives much of its geopolitical influence from the assumption of like-mind -
edness among governments and publics in democratic countries. More fundamentally, 
Biden argues that the fate of America’s own democracy is bound up with that of democracy 
abroad, and he has rhetorically staked his national security strategy on that premise.355 This 
linkage may motivate a broadening of U.S. efforts to combat global techno-authoritarian -
ism, particularly in countries that purchase systems from America’s chief rival, China.
A number of experts dispute the narrative that China purposefully exports techno-author -
itarianism. They argue that Chinese foreign tech sales are driven more by the “pull” from 
governments who demand repressive tools than by any “push” from Beijing. 356 However, 
the strength of Beijing’s “push” may grow over time, if China (like the United States and 
other historical great powers) comes to see a network of like-minded regimes as vital to its 
global interests. Moreover, even a mere “pull” from third countries, when eagerly satisfied 
by China, can pose challenges to U.S. agendas of human rights and democracy promotion 
around the world.
Initiatives like the Digital Silk Road help to spread Chinese hardware, software, and servic-
es, whose architectures embody Beijing’s preference for a more controllable, government-
led internet.357 Western democracies, in contrast, promote international tech standards and 
governance models more compatible with free expression and civil society. T o be sure, the 
United States and its allies have also provided substantial technology to friendly authori -
tarian regimes, from general cloud services to boutique hacking software. 358 Yet multiple 
democracies are taking tentative steps to reduce this complicity—for example, by cracking 
down on the reckless proliferation of advanced hacking tools.359
The development of Chinese techno-authoritarianism, and Beijing’s more general authori-
tarian turn under President Xi Jinping, has prompted Washington to revisit its traditionally 
laissez-faire approach to China’s human rights problems. After the 1989 Tiananmen Square 
massacre, the United States initially sought to condition the overall bilateral trade relation-
ship on improvements to China’s human rights record. But the Bill Clinton administration 
“ultimately abandoned this direct linkage” in favor of permanent most-favored-nation sta-
tus, hoping that economic engagement would open up China politically (while benefiting

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
JON BATEMAN 89 
America economically).360 Afterward, for nearly twenty years, the United States dealt with 
Chinese human rights abuses by levying very targeted punishments that did not jeopardize 
economic ties. For example, it imposed visa restrictions and sanctions on a handful of 
Chinese officials involved in the repression of Tibet and Falun Gong. It has also funded civil 
society and human rights activities in China, including software designed to circumvent 
internet censorship.
But recent U.S. technology restrictions reflect a tougher policy on Chinese human rights, 
with more economic bite. The T rump administration punished some of China’s most 
prominent and successful tech firms, including SenseTime, Megvii, Hikvision, iFLYTEK, 
and Dahua, for their activities in Xinjiang—the first time that human rights violations had 
ever been cited in Entity List designations. 361 Likewise, Biden and Congress have cracked 
down on Chinese imports from Xinjiang, including tech products such as cell phones and 
solar cells, due to forced labor concerns. 362 The solar cell restrictions, in particular, will 
have widespread impact across the solar industry.363 In addition, the U.S. government has 
announced sanctions and visa restrictions for certain Chinese tech companies and their em-
ployees involved in support to the Nicolás Maduro regime in Venezuela and other “regimes 
engaging in human rights abuses globally.”364
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
Unlike past U.S. efforts to punish Chinese human rights abuses, these latest technology 
controls have had tangible economic consequences, resulting in canceled deals and rerouted 
supply chains.365 Still, the recent restrictions represent just a small fraction of the broad-
based China tech restrictions that some are advocating in the name of human rights and 
democracy. U.S. policymakers should understand this slippery slope before they slide much 
further.
Although recent U.S. government restrictions have focused primarily on Xinjiang, and 
Washington officially disavows any intent to impose sweeping reforms on China’s larger po-
litical order, an emerging and politically diverse strain of thought argues for more expansive 
and assertive U.S. efforts to liberalize Chinese politics. 366 From the right, leading former 
T rump administration officials argue that 
the problem with China is its Marxist-
Leninist ideology, and that Washington 
must therefore wage a Manichean struggle 
against Beijing’s official thought system.367 
From the left, some human rights promot-
ers believe that America’s economic rela -
tionship with China “isn’t worth the moral 
cost” and that U.S. leaders should mount 
An emerging and politically diverse 
strain of thought argues for stronger 
U.S. efforts to liberalize Chinese 
politics. Policymakers should 
understand this slippery slope 
before sliding much further.

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
90 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
a “sustained effort” to “[counter] China’s dictatorial apparatus.”368 From the center, national 
security voices such as the Atlantic Council’s “The Longer T elegram” have called for the United 
States to aggravate “internal fault lines of domestic Chinese politics in general and concerning 
Xi’s leadership in particular”—that is, to help effectuate Xi’s removal from power.369
These ideas have growing influence, and they could well push U.S. tech policy down a 
perilous path. Human Rights Watch, for example, has asserted that “human rights abuses 
in China exist, and persist, in part because the US and others haven’t insisted on holistic 
progress, and haven’t imposed a price in response to them.” 370 It therefore signed a letter 
with twenty-three other NGOs, including Freedom House and PEN America, advocating 
“a series of escalating actions against technology companies found to be contributing to 
China’s mass surveillance, including by imposing Global Magnitsky sanctions.”371 But the 
premise is likely mistaken: the United States probably can’t impose a price severe enough to 
deter the vast bulk of Chinese human rights violations. As a result, these “escalating actions” 
would have no clear stopping point.
Much of Beijing’s techno-authoritarianism is a logical outgrowth of the Chinese political 
system itself—a system the United States cannot change and can barely seem to influence. 
The Chinese government seeks to preserve the Communist Party’s power at all costs, and 
the Party stands for a rigid, domineering vision of the Chinese social order. So long as these 
facts remain true, Beijing will continue developing and employing technologies to achieve 
its authoritarian ends. Moreover, the indigenous Chinese technology base provides Beijing 
with ample capability to do so. This means that no amount of U.S. pressure is likely to com-
pel China to relax the basic components of its domestic technological repression. At most, 
U.S. technology controls can impose modest costs and delays in specific cases where China 
currently relies on foreign components, such as advanced semiconductors.372
Meanwhile, a zealous U.S. campaign against the basic apparatus of Chinese techno-author-
itarianism could inflict serious costs on the United States. It would likely devastate bilateral 
diplomatic ties, making cooperation on global issues more difficult and military conflict 
more likely. It would also be difficult to contain. Consider that virtually all Chinese tech 
companies contribute in some way to mass surveillance via the operation of draconian stat-
utes such as China’s Cybersecurity Law and National Security Law. In fact, Beijing’s system 
of mass surveillance and control is suffused throughout the entire Chinese economic and 
societal structure. Chinese tech and non-tech companies alike send sensitive data to the 
state, participate in censorship activities, implement various social credit systems, and gen-
erally seek to anticipate and demonstrate allegiance to Xi’s sociopolitical edicts.373 Aggressive 
attempts to thwart Chinese mass surveillance, censorship, or techno-authoritarianism may 
well lead toward technological and economic divorce.
The United States probably has more room to address China’s sales of repressive technolo-
gies to foreign governments. Some of these governments are less deeply authoritarian than

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
JON BATEMAN 91 
China and/or easier for Washington to influence due to specific bilateral relationships. 
Direct engagement should be tailored to the individual circumstances and motivations of 
third-country governments. Even then, the U.S. government should expect to encounter 
strong resistance in any global campaign to roll back techno-authoritarianism. U.S. democ-
racy promotion efforts have historically struggled during periods when they were comingled 
and conflated with larger geopolitical campaigns, such as the Cold War and the War on 
T error.374 American strategic competition with China presents a similar problem for today’s 
U.S. democracy promoters.
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
The United States is right to respond to the novel and serious twenty-first-century challenge 
of techno-authoritarianism, but it must also avoid embarking on an overambitious cru -
sade with high risks and few rewards. U.S. policy on Chinese domestic techno-nationalism 
should focus on the most egregious abuses. Rather than waging a quixotic battle against 
entrenched Chinese policies like mass surveillance and internet censorship, Washington 
should keep working to punish and stigmatize Beijing’s targeted repression of Uyghurs and 
other minority groups. Such groups do not benefit from what the Chinese Communist 
Party considers to be its authoritarian social compact, and they often seek to remain out -
side of it. In partnership with other countries, U.S. pressure might make some difference 
on Chinese repression of minorities. But if it does not, America can at least limit its moral 
complicity.
T o implement this policy, the State Department and the Intelligence Community should 
collaborate with outside groups to identify Chinese technology systems that support 
Beijing’s targeted efforts to repress minority groups. The Departments of Commerce and 
T reasury, and other agencies, could then 
compile the major ways that these Chinese 
systems rely on direct or indirect American 
support, including U.S. exports (of fin -
ished technology, raw inputs, or non-tech-
nology goods and services) and financing. 
Regulators would then consider which of 
these support flows can be feasibly con -
trolled, based on the U.S. government’s 
ability to trace their movement into and 
inside of China.
U.S. responses to Chinese “export” of techno-authoritarianism should look different de -
pending on the “importing” country, the nature of the technology transaction, and the 
mixture of “push” and “pull” motivations at play. When third countries are specifically seek-
U.S. responses to Chinese “export” 
of techno-authoritarianism should 
depend on the “importing” country, 
the nature of the technology 
transaction, and the mixture of 
“push” and “pull” motivations 
at play.

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
92 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
ing out repressive tools and deem Chinese technology to be the best available, Washington 
can consider using sanctions and other restrictive measures as part of a broader dissuasion 
campaign aimed at both sides of the transaction—recognizing that the prospects of success 
will often be low.
When third countries are instead seeking general purpose technologies and the United 
States is concerned that Chinese products have authoritarian governance models embed -
ded within them, Washington should focus on fostering the development of compelling 
Western alternatives. The U.S. government could, for example, help its companies better 
compete with China on costs, or double down on traditional American advantages such 
as reliability, security, technical assistance, and noncorruption. Restrictive measures could 
then buy time for these positive efforts to produce competitive alternatives to Chinese tech. 
Finally, there will likely be countries that pursue hedging strategies—intentionally divid -
ing purchases between Chinese and Western technologies—to maximize their political and 
economic leverage and autonomy. Hedging countries are difficult to sway; U.S. tech policy 
might draw insights from other domains, such as arms and civilian aircraft sales, where 
hedging occurs.375
CASE STUDIES
The majority of T rump- and Biden-era technology controls related to Chinese human rights 
have wisely focused on ethnic repression in Xinjiang. This includes almost all of the Entity 
List designations of tech companies, for example.
DJI. In a few cases, however, the justifications were vague. In December 2020, the 
Department of Commerce designated four Chinese entities that “have enabled wide-scale 
human rights abuses within China through abusive genetic collection and analysis or high-
technology surveillance, and/or facilitated the export of items by China that aid repressive 
regimes around the world, contrary to U.S. foreign policy interests.” 376 “Abusive genetic 
collection” may refer to Xinjiang, but the Commerce Department did not say this. Notably, 
one of the four companies was the drone manufacturer DJI, which was presumably desig -
nated for its “high-technology surveillance” in China or its sales to repressive regimes.
DJI supported Xinjiang security operations as of 2017–2019, though publicly available 
information is scant and somewhat dated. 377 By declining to specify what exactly DJI had 
done (and when) and failing to reference Xinjiang, the T rump administration undermined 
the strength of its stand and allowed for speculation that human rights may have been a 
pretext. The U.S. government has many other concerns about DJI, including the potential 
military and intelligence applications of its products and the company’s dominant market 
share in a growing industry where American companies have struggled to break through.378

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
JON BATEMAN 93 
Fortunately, the Biden administration has begun to stake a clearer position on DJI’s human 
rights record. Its December placement of DJI on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial 
Complex Companies List indicated that DJI “has provided drones to the Xinjiang Public 
Security Bureau, which are used to surveil Uyghurs in Xinjiang.” 379 This specificity helps 
to give businesses and governments around the world more stable expectations about the 
intention behind U.S. human rights policy and the planned use of restrictive tools. Ideally, 
the U.S. government would take the further step of outlining when DJI’s problematic con-
duct occurred and how the firm could demonstrate reform over time to earn removal from 
these lists. It may be that DJI and other Chinese companies have no intention of undertak-
ing such reforms or of publicly disavowing human rights abuses that Beijing downplays 
or denies. However, establishing the general terms of an off-ramp for sanctioned Chinese 
companies could help Washington clarify its redlines and demonstrate that its human rights 
concerns are sincere.
Xinjiang. The Biden administration should continue looking for and restricting other 
traceable forms of American support for China’s technological repression in Xinjiang. The 
newly signed Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act is a good first step: it requires im -
porters of goods from Xinjiang to prove those goods were not derived from forced labor, 
thereby making forced labor less profitable for Chinese companies and the Chinese gov -
ernment.380 T o complement these import restrictions, Washington should further curb the 
flow of American technologies or tech inputs into Xinjiang. Good candidates for control 
may include technologies that require significant customization or technical support (in -
cluding patches and updates), because ongoing vendor-customer relationships can provide 
a platform to verify Chinese end users and end uses. Other possibilities include enterprise 
software or heavy “smart” equipment sold to Xinjiang-based entities.381
Surveillance sector. A handful of U.S. human rights–oriented tech restrictions have 
not focused on Xinjiang or other particularly egregious Chinese abuses. Biden’s version 
of the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List allows designa -
tion of companies operating in China’s “surveillance technology sector.”382 This undefined 
term could conceivably cover an enormous range of Chinese companies. The T reasury 
Department did try to clarify that it “expects to use its discretion to target” three kinds of 
Chinese companies: those supporting surveillance “that occurs outside of the PRC,” those 
enabling “surveillance of religious or ethnic minorities,” and those “otherwise facilitat[ing] 
repression or serious human rights abuse.”383 While the first two categories make sense, the 
final catch-all requires narrowing and clarification. For example, the T reasury Department’s 
initial designations—of Hikvision and Huawei—failed to cite any specific human rights 
abuses or even explain which enforcement category they fell under.384 (Subsequent designa-
tions of SenseTime, DJI, Megvii, and several other Chinese tech companies did provide 
relevant details on the firms’ involvement in targeted surveillance of Uyghurs.385)

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
94 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Without more clarity on the intent behind this authority, the U.S. government may find 
itself adding an ever-larger and more diverse set of Chinese companies to its restrictive lists. 
Consider that in 2019, the House of Representatives voted 407 to 1 to require sweeping 
export controls of virtually all technologies “critical” to Chinese social control, surveil -
lance, and censorship.386 The Senate version of the bill that eventually became law omitted 
this provision.387 Still, the initial House vote indicates broad support in Washington for 
an expansive and potentially costly campaign against China’s entire techno-authoritarian 
model—not just the worst abuses.
Summit for Democracy. During the Summit for Democracy in December 2021, the 
Biden administration announced several new initiatives related to technology and human 
rights. While the initiatives were generally sound, they nevertheless demonstrated a contin-
ued reluctance to clarify U.S. policy objectives in this area. First, the United States joined 
with Australia, Denmark, and Norway to launch the Export Controls and Human Rights 
Initiative, aimed at “prevent[ing] the proliferation of software and other technologies used 
to enable serious human rights abuses.” 388 The meaning of this initiative depends entirely 
on how “serious human rights abuses” is 
interpreted—a term that Washington has 
so far not defined.
Second, the White House announced a 
series of “grand challenges” to spur in -
novation in what it called “democracy-
affirming technologies.” 389 These technol -
ogies include censorship circumvention 
software, which the United States has long supported. Still, it is odd to brand such 
software as “democracy-affirming” rather than, say, “counter-authoritarian”: its primary 
users are seeking to elude their own authoritarian governments, not “affirm” democrat -
ic ones. The new language has the effect of masking a major U.S. policy dilemma: is 
Washington content simply to “affirm” existing and emerging democracies, with these 
governments’ partnership and consent? Or does the United States seek actively to subvert 
and weaken authoritarian regimes? The latter goal, while instinctually appealing to many 
in Washington, could be disastrous if applied to China and should not be used to justify 
significant bilateral tech restrictions.
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
Washington retains a variety of traditional tools for addressing China’s authoritarianism and 
repression, to include démarches, advocacy in international forums, and moral and material 
support for Chinese dissidents (especially those living abroad), in addition to targeted sanc-
tions against companies and officials involved in the worst abuses. While these are unlikely 
Is Washington content to “affirm” 
existing and emerging democracies 
with their partnership and consent? 
Or does it seek actively to subvert 
and weaken authoritarian regimes?

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
JON BATEMAN 95 
to deter Beijing’s domestic techno-authoritarianism to any large degree, they are sometimes 
the best options available.
There is more the United States can do to combat techno-authoritarianism at a global level, 
including in places where China supplies repressive technologies. First, the U.S. govern -
ment could further crack down on America’s own witting and unwitting transfer of po -
tentially harmful technology products, services, and know-how to human rights abusers. 
For example, Washington could be more parsimonious in licensing the export of advanced 
hacking services; better monitor the conduct of U.S. companies granted such licenses; and 
place postemployment restrictions on former U.S. government officials and contractors 
who have had access to classified American cyber operations techniques. 390 Second, the 
United States could more intensively press its allies on their sale (as with Israel, Italy, and 
Germany) or use (as with Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates) of authoritarian 
technologies, whether sourced from China or elsewhere. The recent Entity List designation 
of Israel’s NSO Group was a long-overdue step in this regard and has already had some 
positive effects.391
And third, America can better model pro-democracy, pro–human rights technology poli -
cies at home, thus earning the credibility to serve as a global leader on these topics. For 
example, U.S. federal agencies could hold transparent and inclusive discussions with civil 
society groups and other affected communities on difficult emerging issues such as law 
enforcement use of facial recognition. The White House Office of Science and T echnology 
Policy recently announced a broad initiative along these lines, aimed at developing a “Bill 
of Rights for an Automated Society.” 392 The practical impact of this “Bill of Rights” will 
depend on its successful implementation in federal rulemaking and legislation.

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
97 
COUNTERING UNFAIR CHINESE 
ECONOMIC PRACTICES AND 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEFT
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
T echnology is increasingly at the heart of America’s many complaints about unfair and 
illegal Chinese economic practices.393 For example, Washington argues that Beijing’s exten-
sive and opaque subsidy regime—which includes preferential government financing and 
procurement contracts—has helped Chinese tech giants like Huawei reach their dominant 
market positions. Another long-standing sore point is Chinese government discrimination 
against foreign firms in such areas as regulatory enforcement, licensing, and market access; 
American tech companies are the most likely of all U.S. firms in China to perceive such 
discrimination.394 Likewise, China’s practice of pressuring foreign companies into sharing 
trade secrets and intellectual property with Chinese corporate partners has disproportionate 
impact on U.S. companies built around specific technology rights, know-how, and data. 
And the list goes on.
As these examples illustrate, the technology sector is a major target of unfair Chinese 
economic practices. T echnology can also enable China to obtain unfair advantages in all 
sectors. For example, the Chinese government carries out large-scale cyber espionage for 
the benefit of domestic firms, and it shields Chinese companies from accountability when 
they conduct their own cyber espionage. The U.S. government classifies these policies as 
unfair trade practices, and it worries that American technological links to China—for 
example, through the digital supply chain—provide additional access points for Chinese 
cyber thefts.

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
98 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Although “unfairness” may be in the eye of the beholder, Washington sees China as violating 
specific bilateral and multilateral commitments, including WTO rules—that is, Beijing’s 
own promises.395 Unfortunately, the United States has had only limited success in resolving 
these issues via formal trade dispute mechanisms and direct diplomacy. Beijing remains 
strongly committed to its economic strategies, and international trade obligations are dif -
ficult to apply and enforce in these kinds of cases. With frustration mounting, Washington 
has begun to take more unilateral measures, including curbs on the flow of technology to 
and from China.
U.S. officials have pointed to several ways that technology controls help combat unfair 
Chinese practices. First, they can serve as a punishment meant to induce changes in Chinese 
behavior. When T rump implemented tariffs on large categories of Chinese goods—includ-
ing tech products like smart devices, flash memory devices, and electronic components—he 
said he was imposing costs for China’s intellectual property theft and seeking concessions at 
the bargaining table.396 Second, technology restrictions can aim to counteract the benefits 
China receives from unfair practices and thus equalize the economic competition, in much 
the same way that countervailing duties offset foreign subsidies. Commerce Secretary Gina 
Raimondo once told Congress that the Entity List—which prevents designated Chinese 
companies from obtaining U.S. technologies, ostensibly for national security reasons—can 
“level the playing field for the American worker.”397 Finally, technology controls can reduce 
China’s opportunities to act unfairly. For example, the U.S. government has strongly dis -
couraged American telecoms from using Chinese equipment, in part so that Beijing cannot 
leverage this equipment to steal U.S. intellectual property.
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
However, U.S. government tech restrictions can also create risks for Washington’s trade 
agendas with China and other countries. In particular, U.S. efforts to counter unfair 
Chinese practices might themselves be deemed unfair or violate international trade rules. 
T rump’s tariffs offer a recent example. Though he imposed them in the name of counter -
ing illegal Chinese intellectual property theft, a WTO panel ruled in 2020 that one large 
tranche of T rump’s tariffs was itself illegal.398 The United States thus faces a dilemma. If it 
sticks to formal trade dispute mechanisms and nonconfrontational direct diplomacy, then 
Beijing’s systemic trade abuses will likely continue. But if Washington reaches instead for 
more powerful unilateral tools, like tariffs and government tech controls, then it could end 
up destabilizing the very global trade order that it professes to be enforcing and protecting. 
And the WTO’s further erosion or collapse might well leave U.S. leaders with less ability 
than before to curb unfair Chinese practices. Washington has an excellent record of win -
ning WTO cases against China—although the most serious and systemic trade issues, like 
subsidies and intellectual property theft, have proven hardest to address in that forum.399

===== PDF_PAGE 112 =====
JON BATEMAN 99 
Washington’s China trade dilemma involves more than just technology, and T rump has not 
been the only president to face it. The Obama administration took issue with several WTO 
appellate rulings, including those seen as overly accommodating to China. In response, 
Obama blocked the appointment of multiple WTO appellate judges—an unprecedented 
and controversial series of interventions.400 T rump escalated this practice, eventually block-
ing all WTO appellate appointments and thus denying the body a quorum. 401 Biden has 
affirmed the T rump policy—in effect, halting the appeals process for all countries until 
the WTO resolves U.S. concerns with the process and substance of dispute settlement. 402 
Washington’s goal is to force reforms of what it sees as a broken system that tolerates unfair 
Chinese practices (among other problems), but its tactics risk weakening the system further.
While the United States plays hardball 
with the WTO dispute system, its barrage 
of new China-oriented tech controls may 
also test the limits of WTO substantive 
principles. At their core, these principles 
bar trade barriers that discriminate by na -
tional origin.403 Many recent U.S. tech re -
strictions would seem to clash—in spirit, if 
not in letter—with that idea. Consider executive orders or regulatory actions whose terms 
apply exclusively to China, such as the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex 
Companies List, the Section 889 blacklist, and T rump’s attempted bans on TikT ok, WeChat, 
Alipay, and other Chinese apps. Other U.S. tech controls, like the FCC’s Covered List, are 
technically not focused on any specific country but have so far been used almost exclusively 
against Chinese firms. The Commerce Department’s ICTS supply chain security rule and 
the T rump Energy Department’s bulk power system regulation applied just to China and a 
handful of other designated “foreign adversaries.” Meanwhile, CFIUS and the Entity List 
are not explicitly tailored to China, yet China has become a primary focus of enforcement. 
All these tools function as trade barriers by placing substantial limits on Chinese companies’ 
ability to buy technology from, sell technology to, or otherwise transact with Americans.
T o U.S. leaders, such policy tools are familiar, accepted, and fully compatible with the 
international trade system. The United States continues to cite its long-standing position 
that national security–related restrictions fall outside of WTO scrutiny. 404 Although most 
other countries (including U.S. allies) do not accept the existence of such a broad exception, 
they have traditionally declined to press the point, because the U.S. government histori -
cally did not impose many such barriers.405 Yet Washington’s self-restraint is now loosening, 
in large part due to concerns about China and its technology. In the tech domain alone, 
Washington has greatly increased the number and scope of trade, investment, and other 
economic restrictions in just the last few years. Meanwhile, U.S. officials in both parties 
flirt openly with an expanded definition of “national security” that encompasses “economic 
Nonconfrontational diplomacy 
probably cannot stop Beijing’s 
systemic trade abuses. But more 
powerful unilateral tools could 
destabilize the global trade order.

===== PDF_PAGE 113 =====
100 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
security.” If the American “national security exception” becomes an “economic security 
exception,” it would virtually negate the WTO framework.
Already, foreign governments have seized on the precedents created by U.S. actions to as -
sert their own national interests. Since 2016, Japan, Russia, the United Arab Emirates, and 
Saudi Arabia have all for the first time cited an American-style national security exception 
in WTO disputes.406 Beijing could take the same path, using the United States’ own posi -
tion to justify Chinese policies (like market access restrictions) that Washington fervently 
protests.
The United States must think hard about its endgame for bilateral and global trade, in the 
technology sector and beyond. In a best-case scenario for Washington, its tough tactics 
somehow push Beijing (and other countries) to accept strong, enforceable new trade rules 
that rein in unfair Chinese practices. This would be a monumental achievement: negotia -
tions on new WTO trade rules have stalled for the last two decades, and the United States 
would now be negotiating from a position of reduced global influence, amid heightened 
tensions with a strategic competitor. In a worst-case scenario, the WTO system collapses 
under the weight of U.S.-China economic conflict. Although Washington would still have 
other bilateral and multilateral trade agreements to fall back on, China and other nations 
would likely institute new economic and national security–related trade barriers that harm 
the United States.
Some amount of risk-taking by Washington makes sense. The status quo should not be 
idealized: open trading principles are far from fully implemented and sometimes more 
honored in the breach, particularly by China. The United States therefore has strong reason 
to implement measures it thinks will protect American economic interests and add to pres-
sure for structural reforms. It also has reason to believe that the WTO system will merely 
bend, not break, under this pressure. The system has survived for decades despite numerous 
international disputes and changing geo-economic and geopolitical dynamics. U.S. tech 
controls have so far not sent bilateral trade ties with China (let alone the larger WTO sys -
tem) into a death spiral.
Still, the United States must tread carefully. If present trends continue, American technol-
ogy restrictions aimed at China will significantly broaden and intensify in the coming years, 
further raising the stakes. Some of the rhetoric heard in Washington—including limitless 
notions of “economic security,” or the brute goal of “destroying” China’s most prominent 
companies—directly contravenes international trading principles and implies a dangerous 
reckoning in the future. Worse, these risks often go unacknowledged: U.S. officials and 
analysts are rarely willing to describe America’s China-oriented tech restrictions as trade 
barriers that skirt the line of national discrimination. By avoiding this issue, they sidestep 
fundamental questions: Are U.S. actions compatible with today’s international rules? If 
not, what new rule set would Washington propose? Would other nations agree to these new

===== PDF_PAGE 114 =====
JON BATEMAN 101 
rules? And if China and others began to leverage any new rules for their own advantage, 
would Americans still benefit in the end?
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
The use of technology controls to address unfair Chinese economic practices should be 
nested within a comprehensive U.S. strategy for shaping the international trading system 
as a whole. China would be a major but not exclusive focus of this strategy. The overall 
goal would be to describe a desired U.S. end-state for international trade. Fundamental 
questions include whether Washington should seek to reinforce WTO open trading prin -
ciples or partially roll them back, and what new kind of rules the United States might 
prefer instead. For example, what would be the desired parameters of an internationally 
approved “national security exception”? At its heart, a U.S. strategy should deal with 
practical questions such as which other major nations could be feasibly brought on board, 
and what enforcement mechanisms could realistically achieve and sustain the American 
vision over time.
Due to the complexity of international trade and its sweeping implications for all U.S. 
interests, the process for developing a comprehensive trade strategy should be inclusive. 
For example, the NSC might share leadership of this process with the National Economic 
Council and the Domestic Policy Council to ensure that its outcome serves the domes -
tic needs of the American people. USTR and the State Department would be important 
but not dominant voices. The Intelligence Community could vet the likelihood of various 
scenarios, including a successful effort to reform the international trade system, as well as 
alternative futures such as the unintended degradation or collapse of the system. The final 
strategy, once ratified by the president, would guide how regulatory bodies such as the 
Commerce Department, T reasury Department, and CFIUS evaluate the purpose, benefits, 
and risks of technology controls aimed at combating unfair Chinese economic practices.
CASE STUDIES
The Biden administration has taken some positive steps toward an international trade 
strategy, but it has not yet publicly addressed the core policy dilemmas. In May 2021, 
U.S. T rade Representative Katherine Tai delivered a report to Congress articulating Biden’s 
official trade policy agenda. 407 It promised a major focus on combating unfair Chinese 
economic practices, especially those that “threaten our technological edge [and] weaken 
our supply chain resiliency.” Although T rump’s government had said the same thing, the 
Biden report rightly called for “a comprehensive strategy and more systematic approach 
than the piecemeal approach of the recent past.” T o that end, it announced that “the Biden

===== PDF_PAGE 115 =====
102 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
Administration is conducting a comprehensive review of U.S. trade policy toward China as 
part of its development of its overall China strategy.” 
This review culminated in October with a major speech by Tai on China. Tai criticized 
China for “pour[ing] billions of dollars into targeted industries and continu[ing] to shape 
its economy to the will of the state”—citing solar cells and semiconductors, among other 
examples.408 She vowed to “directly engage with China on its industrial policies.” Tai ad -
dressed the WTO that same month, reaffirming America’s commitment to the body while 
calling for unspecified institutional reforms in several key areas.409
Tai’s statements contained laudable objec -
tives and welcome messages. Nevertheless, 
they still elided basic tensions in the U.S. 
approach. The report to Congress, for ex -
ample, affirmed that “opening markets and 
reducing trade barriers are fundamental to 
any trade agenda.” Yet it made no men -
tion of the many ways that Washington 
has sought to curb technology trade with 
China. It said nothing about Huawei, ZTE, DJI, Hikvision, or other Chinese tech compa-
nies recently cut off from U.S. markets, suppliers, or investors. It was silent on the growing 
use and expanding scope of restrictive tools like the Entity List, CFIUS, export controls, 
and IEEPA. It omitted any discussion of America’s position on the WTO national security 
exception and the rise of copycat claims by other countries.
Such omissions aren’t unusual in public (or even private) U.S. government strategy docu -
ments. The Biden administration probably wants to reserve discretion at the negotiating 
table and to avoid taking controversial stands before they prove necessary. The important 
thing for now is that senior U.S. officials deliberate on these basic dilemmas in a structured 
way. While some technology restrictions are appropriate and sustainable responses to unfair 
Chinese practices, there must be an anticipated stopping point. The Biden administration 
should fully understand the risks involved, think about its endgame, and eventually signal 
its intentions to China and other trading partners. Simplistic invocations of “unfairness” or 
“U.S. national security interests” will no longer suffice to navigate these choppy, uncharted 
waters.
Tai’s report affirmed that “opening 
markets and reducing trade barriers 
are fundamental” goals. Yet it 
made no mention of Chinese tech 
companies recently cut off from U.S. 
markets, suppliers, or investors.

===== PDF_PAGE 116 =====
JON BATEMAN 103 
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
T ech controls or no tech controls, Washington lacks any easy path to stop unfair Chinese 
economic practices. Such practices are highly beneficial to Beijing and hard for outsiders to 
monitor, let alone deter. Successive U.S. administrations have protested and pushed back 
with little success. T o change these dynamics, Washington needs to amass significant lever-
age over China, then use some combination of bilateral and multilateral talks—including 
at international forums like the WTO—to secure and enforce an agreement with Beijing.
T rump made one attempt to accomplish this, using unilateral tariffs for leverage, but he 
botched the negotiations by settling for market access concessions rather than seeking ma -
jor structural reforms. Biden is taking the smarter, albeit slower approach of trying to culti-
vate a united front among U.S. allies and trade partners (while holding onto T rump’s tariffs 
as a bargaining chip). For example, the recently established U.S.-EU T rade and T echnology 
Council has developed an ambitious multilateral agenda to coordinate policy on a number 
of key issues relevant to Chinese technology and decoupling.410 And Washington has been 
using multilateral fora like the G7, the G20, and the WTO to discuss “market distortions 
and other unfair trade practices” by China.411
Time will tell whether Biden’s approach yields concrete results. America’s European and 
Asian allies have so far proven less inclined than the United States to squarely confront 
Beijing over its unfair practices. In the end, Washington may need to make concessions of 
its own to China (and others) as part of the negotiating process. If China remains obstinate, 
then Washington will face difficult choices about the future of international trade.

===== PDF_PAGE 117 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 118 =====
105 
COMPETING AND LEADING IN 
STRATEGIC INDUSTRIES
RISKS OF INTERDEPENDENCE
As China’s technological prowess grows, U.S. officials worry that China could come to lead 
and possibly dominate the most economically significant tech industries of the future. This 
concern is not about China’s unfair practices per se; it is about unfavorable outcomes for U.S. 
competitiveness. The distinction is often glossed over, yet it is crucial. Even on a level play-
ing field, China could potentially outcompete the United States in some tech industries. 
This troubles American policymakers, most of whom have only known an era of peerless 
technological leadership by U.S. companies. They now see China catching up (or even 
moving ahead) in the technology areas expected to matter most for twenty-first-century 
economies.
China has already become the global leader in 5G telecommunications equipment (a crux 
of the future digital backbone), as well as commercial drones, Internet of Things devices, 
mobile payments, solar cells, and smart cities, among other technology areas. And where 
China does not lead, it is often a world-class competitor—for example, in AI (the most-
hyped of all emerging technologies), smartphones, electric vehicles, and much more. While 
unfair economic practices have contributed to China’s success, they do not tell the whole 
story. China ranks first globally in STEM graduates and second in R&D spending. 412 Its 
geographically concentrated tech hubs have revolutionized supply chain and manufacturing 
integration. And government tech policies like Made in China 2025 and the Digital Silk 
Road, although often misunderstood and overestimated in the West, nevertheless demon -

===== PDF_PAGE 119 =====
106 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
strate Beijing’s national focus on technology strategy—a relative weak point for the United 
States in recent decades.413
If China halted all unfair practices tomorrow, its tech industry would still likely represent 
the most significant challenge to U.S. technology leadership and global competitiveness 
since the rise of Japan in the 1980s. 414 Of course, China’s challenge might fade over time, 
just as Japan’s did. China could experience a 
bursting debt bubble, or a “middle income 
trap,” among other potential causes of tech-
nological stagnation. But Washington has 
little ability to predict, let alone influence, 
such developments. If the current trajec -
tory continues, the United States will have 
several problems on its hands.
At the most basic level, losing America’s technological edge in major industries would mean 
fewer U.S. jobs, lower GDP , reduced tax revenue, and other macroeconomic setbacks. It 
would also diminish the global influence that America derives from its technology leader -
ship. For example, U.S. dominance of digital platforms has provided unparalleled intelli -
gence collection opportunities and helped to project certain American political and cultural 
values into foreign societies. It also provided the Biden administration with concrete lever-
age to shape and secure a recent global tax agreement. 415 Loss of American technological 
dominance would lessen those forms of power and influence. Moreover, it would weaken 
the so-called “national security innovation base,” a Washington term for the American tech 
industry’s special role in generating new U.S. military and intelligence capabilities. 416 No 
country wants to fall behind in these ways, and the United States is particularly reliant on 
its technological leadership as a source of economic and national security advantages.
Still, the United States could survive and even thrive despite a loss of dominance in some 
important tech areas—so long as it remains relatively competitive overall. The more serious 
threat is that China itself becomes so technologically dominant that American companies 
are largely frozen out of many important markets. U.S. leaders worry that China’s technol-
ogy gains could become strongly self-reinforcing, paving the way toward just this kind 
of dominance. 417 Certain tech markets—5G telecommunications equipment is a prime 
example—have high barriers to entry, significant first-mover advantages, and deep linkages 
to many other sectors. In such cases, China’s early leadership could enable its companies 
to lock in global market share and seek to dominate related or adjacent industries. Once 
Chinese firms secured strong enough positions, they and the Chinese government could 
use unfair practices, like predatory pricing and exclusionary deals, to further entrench their 
advantages.
If China halted all unfair practices 
tomorrow, it would still likely 
represent the most significant 
challenge to U.S. technology 
leadership since Japan in the 1980s.

===== PDF_PAGE 120 =====
JON BATEMAN 107 
These worries have driven U.S. policymakers to try to curb bilateral tech ties that Washington 
sees as helping China catch up with or overtake the United States—especially in the most 
economically important technology areas, where long-term leadership is at stake. T wo laws 
passed in 2018 illustrate this trend.
The Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization Act (FIRRMA) calls for CFIUS to 
scrutinize transactions involving “a country of special concern that has a demonstrated or 
declared strategic goal of acquiring a type of critical technology or critical infrastructure 
that would affect United States leadership in areas related to national security.” 418 This is 
a clear mandate to thwart Made in China 2025, Beijing’s strategic technology develop -
ment plan. Likewise, the Export Control Reform Act (ECRA) instructs the Commerce 
Department to limit exports of “emerging and foundational technologies.” Although these 
categories remain undefined, Made in China 2025 has served as a starting point for U.S. 
government analysis.419 T echnically, both FIRRMA and ECRA describe national security as 
their sole focus. But economic considerations helped spur Congress to act and will certainly 
influence future regulatory actions.
RISKS AND LIMITATIONS OF DEFENSIVE MEASURES
Preventing China from seizing control of key tech industries is a worthy policy goal. The 
United States should not underwrite its own economic dislocation if it can avoid doing 
so. Nevertheless, there is risk of overreach—particularly if Washington views technology 
controls as the primary means of maintaining its own preeminence, rather than as stopgap 
measures to thwart Chinese dominance so that other American investments have time to 
take root. U.S. policymakers should keep several points in mind.
First, the “cure” of government technology controls can sometimes be as harmful as the 
“disease” of aggressive Chinese competition. Export controls, Entity List designations, and 
similar restrictions reduce American companies’ sales to China, cutting the revenue avail -
able to plow back into R&D. Visa bans, deemed export curbs, and supply chain security 
requirements restrict U.S. access to Chinese talent and subcomponents, imposing higher 
costs and greater delays on American innovators. Inbound investment restrictions limit 
U.S. firms’ opportunities to raise capital from and achieve corporate synergies with Chinese 
entities. If U.S. controls are unilateral, then European and Asian rivals can gain competitive 
advantages over American firms. Moreover, China can and will retaliate against significant 
restrictive measures.
For these reasons, trade groups like the Semiconductor Industry Association, the Business 
Roundtable, the National Association of Manufacturers, and the Information T echnology 
Industry Council have sought to limit the use of ECRA and similar new authorities. 420 
Although trade associations have narrow vested interests that can diverge considerably from

===== PDF_PAGE 121 =====
108 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
the national interest, the coalitions raising these concerns have been notably broad-based 
and diverse. They include a set of groups that represent “all major research universities and 
medical schools in the United States,” which collectively warned that “overly broad or vague 
controls will result in unnecessary restrictions that will stifle scientific progress and impede 
research.”421
Second, technology controls can conflict with Washington’s stated objective of fair, rules-
based economic competition, as described earlier. WTO rules do not allow a country to 
curb trade in certain industries just because they are seen as economically important. In 
fact, this runs directly counter to WTO principles. If the United States publicly embraces 
an economic strategy of restricting trade in important tech industries, then China and 
other countries will step up protections of their own “strategic” industries (whether tech or 
non-tech). Although the WTO system urgently needs reforms, U.S. leaders have not yet 
articulated a credible vision for reform or a plan for gaining agreement from China and 
other major trading partners.
Third, it is not easy to identify economically strategic technologies that merit governmental 
controls. The U.S. government has historically struggled to make accurate, useful predic -
tions about what innovations will be important in the future and to draw administrable 
lines around fuzzy technology areas.
In the 1990s, economic competition from Japan spurred the U.S. government and outside 
groups to produce a number of so-called critical technology lists to help inform policymak-
ing.422 Defining “criticality” proved to be a major challenge, given the many different U.S. 
interests impacted by technology. In part for this reason, the lists were usually too broad 
(naming whole fields of practice, such as “programming languages”) and/or too long (some 
had over 100 items) to be useful in policymaking. In hindsight, it is also apparent that 
many items designated as critical turned out not to be, while some technologies excluded 
from the lists wound up having vast economic impact. For example, the 1995 White House 
list cited “virtual reality software” (still a marginal industry today) as critical, but omit -
ted personal mobile devices (a then-extant technology that has since revolutionized global 
communications).423 Critical technology lists ultimately failed to have much policy impact, 
and the effort was abandoned in the 2000s.
The T rump administration sought to revive this moribund tradition by publishing a “criti-
cal and emerging technologies list” in October 2020. 424 Unfortunately, this list reflected 
many old pitfalls. It was vague and equivocal in defining the criteria for inclusion—at one 
point saying the listed technologies were critical to overall U.S. national security and/or 
economic advantages, then later calling them critical merely for U.S. government agencies. 
Although the list was manageable in size (just twenty items), the individual entries had 
sweeping scope: “Energy T echnologies,” “Communication and Networking T echnologies,” 
“Data Science and Storage,” “Medical and Public Health T echnologies,” “Biotechnologies,”

===== PDF_PAGE 122 =====
JON BATEMAN 109 
The U.S. government should 
develop more detailed and robust 
internal processes for evaluating 
the economic consequences of 
emerging technologies.
and so on. And its publication so late in 
a presidential administration meant that 
T rump’s list, like others before it, lacked 
clear policymaking relevance.
The Biden administration refreshed this list 
in February 2022.425 The new categories of 
critical and emerging technologies do not 
differ much from T rump’s, though Biden’s version helpfully elaborates on each category by 
defining multiple subcategories. Still, the list’s selection criteria and policymaking purpose 
remain unclear. Does it name technologies that “may be critical to U.S. national security,” 
or merely those with “the potential to further” it? Both formulations are given. National 
security, meanwhile, is defined as including “economic prosperity and opportunity”—a 
defensible framing that nevertheless clouds the specific rationale behind each entry’s inclu-
sion, making it harder to use the list as policy guidance. In fact, the White House empha -
sized that “this list should not be interpreted as a priority list for either policy development or 
funding.”426 Yet it also recommended that agencies consult the list when designing “mea -
sures that respond to threats against U.S. security” and “initiatives to research and develop 
technologies”—that is, policy development and funding.
Washington does not necessarily need (and probably shouldn’t try to create) a singular 
list of all technologies critical for every U.S. national interest. But it does need something 
beyond what it has now. Routine policy actions like export control listings and CFIUS 
investigations already require some predictions of future technological importance, despite 
the inherent difficulties. Yet formally, these policy tools have an exclusive focus on national 
security concerns, with economic interests left as a potential but largely undefined (and 
sometimes unspoken) consideration. The U.S. government should develop more detailed 
and robust internal processes for evaluating the economic consequences of emerging tech -
nologies, so that agencies can tailor controls to critical areas where China threatens to secure 
dominance.
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
Government technology controls should play a specific, limited role in the U.S. quest to 
maintain economic leadership and competitiveness. The president should instruct regula -
tory agencies to institute restrictive measures only when necessary to hold off looming 
Chinese dominance in defined strategic industries, thus buying time for other positive 
American investments to bear fruit. Implementing this guidance would involve creating 
a formal governmental process to conduct (or oversee) geo-economic analysis of technolo -
gies. A new process would need to avoid replicating 1990s-era mistakes while also adapting 
to today’s geostrategic, technological, and governance realities. Fortunately, scholars and

===== PDF_PAGE 123 =====
110 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
independent analysts have offered a number of useful recommendations and lessons for 
policymakers.427
One approach would be for geo-economic assessments to identify technologies that rate 
highly across three dimensions: economic value, defensibility, and urgency of control. Each 
of these dimensions can be defined and measured in various ways. For example, highly 
economically valuable technologies might include those set to become top exports (as semi-
conductors are now), to produce the largest companies of the future (as with today’s digital 
advertising sector), or to have powerful second- or third-order effects on many other indus-
tries (like clean energy or advanced batteries).
Highly defensible technologies would have strong winner-take-all qualities, meaning that 
a market leader could capture disproportionate gains and then defend its position for long 
periods, perhaps due to network effects (as in today’s social media market) or high barriers 
to entry (as in telecommunications equipment). Frameworks for evaluating technological 
defensibility can be found in antitrust economics and venture capital investing, among 
other domains. Finally, technologies in urgent need of control are those where a window of 
competitive opportunity could soon close. Washington might assess whether technological 
and market developments during the next five to ten years could enable China to achieve 
and lock in long-term dominance.
If the United States publicly announces an official process for identifying and controlling 
economically strategic technologies, China and other countries would likely accuse the 
United States of a flagrant assault on WTO principles. Therefore, the U.S. government 
should seek to maintain its tradition of requiring that new technology controls have a 
national security justification, even if, internally, the initial impetus for considering a con -
trol is economic competition. Ideally, new controls should be framed as continuations of 
historic U.S. policy, to include American claims of a WTO national security exception; 
new precedents should be created only when necessary. The U.S. framework for identifying 
economically strategic technologies should probably remain confidential or classified.
CASE STUDIES
5G. The T rump administration was right to identify 5G telecommunications equipment as 
a major target for technology restrictions. Countries all over the world are making or plan-
ning massive investments in such equipment, and deployment is expected to drive many 
ancillary innovations in areas such as autonomous vehicles, the Internet of Things, and 
mobile apps. Because these are generational investments, market leaders like Huawei have 
an opportunity to establish firm footholds in the purchasing countries. And the purchases 
are all happening within a short time frame as countries race to deploy 5G, meaning the 
window of opportunity will close within the next few years.428

===== PDF_PAGE 124 =====
JON BATEMAN 111 
Semiconductors. Semiconductors are also a strategic industry: they rank among the most 
important technologies by overall sales and are essential to almost all modern activity, while 
the most advanced semiconductors will drive next-generation technological applications 
like machine learning. Yet U.S. semiconductor firms also rely on China for much of their 
revenue, and most experts believe China still remains about a decade behind the United 
States and its allies in key aspects of semiconductor design and manufacturing.429 U.S. gov-
ernment controls on this sector should therefore be carefully targeted.
The United States should restrict China from accessing only the most advanced semiconductor 
technology, while allowing sales of commodity chips to help maintain U.S. market share and 
fund R&D. The T rump administration was right to press the Netherlands to prevent export 
of extreme ultraviolet lithography systems to China.430 These would facilitate manufacture of 
5- and 7-nanometer node chips and thus help China to leap well ahead of its current capabili-
ties. At the same time, the Biden administration was also right to grant U.S. firms licenses to 
sell automotive chips—considered commodity items—to Huawei.431 A more difficult case was 
T rump’s tightening of rules for so-called deemed exports, in effect requiring more scrutiny for 
Chinese nationals working in the U.S. semiconductor industry.432 Although the costs and ben-
efits are difficult to independently assess, it makes sense in principle to prioritize protection of 
critical, cutting-edge intellectual property and trade secrets in the semiconductor sector.
Consumer devices. However, very few technologies sold in large quantities to individual 
consumers should be subject to government control on the grounds of economic criticality. 
Smartphones, laptops and desktop computers, Internet of Things devices, consumer-grade 
drones, home network hardware, gaming systems, and most mobile apps should be rela -
tively unrestricted on economic grounds. These industries are generally commoditized or 
will likely become so in the near future. They typically feature gradual, incremental shifts 
in technology, pricing, and market share over time—not defensible moats or closing win -
dows of opportunity for one country to gain enduring dominance. For example, the Biden 
administration should not add Honor, a smartphone maker spun off from Huawei, to the 
Entity List, as it is reportedly considering.433 Republican members of Congress have urged 
the designation, but their vague argument seems premised on the spurious notion that 
Honor operates “in a strategic sector.”434
AI. Artificial intelligence is frequently described as economically strategic—perhaps more 
often than any other technology area. Evangelists claim that AI will transform all other in-
dustries and become a primary determinant of competitive success. Even if this is true, com-
petitive advantages in many aspects of AI do not appear to be very defensible. Foundational 
know-how proliferates widely (due to open, international academic ecosystems) and would 
be difficult to control (due to the relative ease of stealing or copying algorithms and training 
data), compared to more physically embodied trade secrets like semiconductor manufactur-
ing equipment.435 Thus, U.S. government efforts to control AI research or software would 
often be ineffectual.

===== PDF_PAGE 125 =====
112 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
While China is quickly progressing in AI capabilities, there is also no clear sign that it verges 
on somehow dominating the industry. China does have certain advantages, including its 
ability to pool large stores of data with less concern for privacy and its access to massive, 
cheap sources of labor for data cleaning and preparation. Yet the United States still pro -
duces higher-quality AI research and has better access to data from key Western markets. At 
best, China seems capable of developing a modest lead in certain subdisciplines, like facial 
recognition, where Chinese advantages seem most relevant.436 But any such lead would be 
neither comprehensive (across all AI applications) nor permanent (foreclosing future U.S. 
competition).437
AI does appear to have some strategic terrain—bottlenecks in the AI value-chain where one 
nation might gain outsized advantages and seek to exclude its competitors. Semiconductors, 
discussed earlier, are one example. Another is the pool of high-end scientific and engineer-
ing talent. While the overall AI field is large, many of the most promising breakthroughs 
have come from a few individuals and companies, such as Alphabet’s DeepMind. 438 
Concentrating this talent together in one ecosystem seems to create disproportionate in -
novative benefits—although the effect is likely temporary, as AI innovations often prolifer-
ate widely within a few years. Thus, the United States should focus first and foremost on 
attracting the best AI talent and avoid decoupling the labor pool. This means ensuring that 
U.S. visa restrictions do not drive away top Chinese AI researchers from American universi-
ties and companies, unless a clear national security threat exists.
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
America’s ability to compete against China will depend much more on the health of the 
U.S. innovation ecosystem (so-called “offense”) than on any attempt to thwart or impede 
Chinese technological progress (“defense”). There are at least three major categories of of -
fensive opportunities.439
First, Congress should greatly increase the amount of federal R&D spending. Such spend-
ing was historically pivotal in creating what we now know as Silicon Valley, but has atro -
phied in recent decades. 440 The draft U.S. Innovation and Competition Act and America 
COMPETES Act, although not without problematic elements, mark important steps to -
ward committing greater federal resources to R&D. Second, Congress should invest more 
in the social and physical infrastructure that supports technological innovation and access. 
Examples include STEM education (at all levels), STEM workforce training, a national re-
search cloud, and rural broadband.441 Third, the Justice Department and the Federal T rade 
Commission should continue stepping up their antitrust scrutiny of the tech sector, and 
Congress should move forward with intelligent statutory reforms to promote competition. 
These would help ensure that the U.S. tech sector remains dynamic and innovative.

===== PDF_PAGE 126 =====
113 
OBTAINING GENERAL LEVERAGE 
OVER CHINA
Technology itself is not always the sole concern animating U.S. tech policy. In the China 
context, U.S. leaders have sometimes used the technology relationship as a pawn in wider 
bilateral negotiations. For example, the T rump administration used its Entity List designa-
tions of ZTE and Huawei to help advance broader trade talks with China. During the talks, 
T rump rescinded the ZTE designation as a personal gesture to Xi, and held out the prospect 
of sparing Huawei during subsequent negotiations.442 Yet T rump did not use these chits to 
secure major concessions on tech-related issues like intellectual property protection. He 
accepted relatively weak commitments on those issues and instead bargained for China to 
buy more U.S. agricultural products and grant market access to American financial services 
firms. In a roundabout way, T rump used the leverage of technological controls to move 
China on unrelated matters.
The Entity List designations of ZTE and Huawei, and the attempted ban and forced sale 
of TikT ok, suggested a template. These episodes taught U.S. policymakers that they held 
the power of life and death over certain Chinese tech companies, and that Beijing prizes 
these companies enough to bargain over 
their fate. Given how much Washington 
wants from China in numerous domains, 
and how few reliable tools the United 
States has for bringing Beijing to the table, 
there is strong temptation to use technol -
ogy controls as a bargaining chip in non-
technology-oriented negotiations.
It is hard enough to design a U.S. 
tech policy that succeeds on its own 
terms. This can become virtually 
impossible if tech issues become 
entangled with unrelated objectives.

===== PDF_PAGE 127 =====
114 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
This kind of maneuver should be rare, however. Because U.S.-China technology ties are so 
important and sensitive in their own right, there are few other issues salient enough to jus-
tify their use as a bargaining chip. Doing so risks adding even more pressure to an increas-
ingly fragile technology relationship. It is hard enough to design an American tech policy 
that succeeds in addressing the complex set of challenges and opportunities that China 
represents. This can become virtually impossible if tech issues become entangled with, and 
subordinated to, unrelated policy objectives.
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
The president should instruct regulatory agencies, diplomats, and trade negotiators not to 
use China-related technology restrictions as leverage for unrelated matters, barring excep -
tional circumstances. Biden should consider exceptions only when they are likely to ad -
vance a handful of supreme priorities, such as combating climate change. Before making an 
exception, the president should ask the Intelligence Community and his negotiating team 
about the odds that doing so would help win valuable concessions from Beijing.
CASE STUDIES
Phase One trade talks. T rump’s maneuvers in trade talks with China illustrate both the 
promise and the peril of using technology controls as general bilateral leverage. ZTE was 
originally placed on the Entity List in 2016 for violating U.S. sanctions against Iran and 
North Korea. So when T rump later granted the company a reprieve to advance his trade 
talks with China, domestic critics argued that he had compromised U.S. national security.443 
The gambit did make sense in theory. The Phase One trade talks provided a rare opportu -
nity to address structural issues in the U.S.-
China economic relationship—a prospect 
of surpassing value to the American people. 
By comparison, unyielding enforcement 
of sanctions on Iran and North Korea was 
relatively unimportant.
In the end, though, T rump squandered 
whatever leverage these tactics gave him. He chose to focus his Phase One deal on minor 
matters like the trade deficit, while neglecting more central grievances such as Chinese 
subsidies and forced technology transfer. The Entity List maneuver therefore accomplished 
little—except that it caused China and many other observers to see the list itself as a tool of 
realpolitik, not a legitimate national security instrument.
Trump’s maneuvers in trade talks 
with China illustrate both the promise 
and the peril of using technology 
controls as general bilateral leverage.

===== PDF_PAGE 128 =====
JON BATEMAN 115 
Climate change. The Biden administration may face its own decision points in climate 
change negotiations with China. China has already made some recent climate commit -
ments, but much more work remains. Given the paramount importance of addressing cli -
mate change, Biden should consider whether defensive technology measures could serve as 
bargaining chips—tightening restrictions to increase U.S. leverage, or loosening them to 
facilitate a deal. The Justice Department, for example, agreed in September 2021 to resolve 
charges against Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou, allowing her to leave Canadian custody and 
return to China. T wo Chinese scholars told the South China Morning Post that the move 
would make Beijing more willing to cooperate on climate and other issues. 444 Weeks later, 
the United States and China signed a new bilateral climate agreement.445
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
Washington is right to seek leverage over Beijing, though the best and most appropriate 
sources of leverage will vary depending on the issue at hand. In general, the United States 
will have the strongest leverage when it can rally multiple major countries to its side. The 
Biden administration has therefore tried to build coalitions of allies and partners on such 
issues as China’s human rights record, its cyber operations, and more. Granted, building 
and sustaining these international coalitions is a challenging task. Compared to the United 
States, most other countries—even close U.S. partners such as the Five Eyes, the European 
Union, Japan, and South Korea—tend to be more accommodative toward China. Biden 
can help set America’s China-related global diplomacy on the right course, but these diplo-
matic challenges will likely outlast his administration.

===== PDF_PAGE 129 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 130 =====
117 
SHAPING U.S. DOMESTIC NARRATIVES
China-related technology controls can be used to shape American public discourse and 
political narratives. There are both legitimate and dubious reasons for doing so.
First, U.S. leaders sometimes use announcements of new technology restrictions to raise do-
mestic awareness about tech threats from China and thereby shock complacent private ac-
tors into more careful behavior. For context, the government does not directly control most 
of the U.S.-China technology relationship. On a day-to-day basis, American businesses 
and academic institutions choose when and where to cooperate with Chinese counterparts, 
weighing risks and benefits according to their own tolerances. When private stakeholders 
do not seem to fully appreciate the risks of technological cooperation with China, U.S. gov-
ernment restrictions can be a powerful messaging tool. Of course, the government should 
first try to communicate directly with these stakeholders and share appropriate evidence 
about specific threats.
Second, and more questionably, U.S. leaders sometimes institute China-related technology 
controls as part of domestic political gamesmanship. Anti-China measures are often popu-
lar. U.S. politicians may see them as opportunities to burnish national security and populist 
credentials, especially during election season. Even the most enlightened U.S. leaders will 
sometimes have mixed motives. From a policy perspective, this is worrisome. Parochial 
political concerns should never motivate something as serious as technological decoupling. 
The government should institute guardrails to minimize this behavior.

===== PDF_PAGE 131 =====
118 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROCESSES
Executive branch agencies should adhere to regularized procedures for evaluating technol -
ogy controls wherever possible. In many cases, regulatory agencies have long-standing inter-
nal processes and statutory constraints, such as the Administrative Procedure Act, overseen 
by the courts. In other cases, broad presidential powers (like IEEPA) can be wielded quite 
freely, including as a way to circumvent normal decisionmaking by agencies. These short -
cuts should be reserved for exceptional situations, such as when the government must act 
immediately. And when the government creates new decisionmaking processes, such as 
the new ICTS supply chain security review 
regime, it should anticipate and account for 
potential abuse.
At the same time, oversight elements 
across the federal government should give 
special attention to China-related technol -
ogy controls, given the high policy stakes 
and the substantial risk of politicization or 
mismanagement. Congressional committees of jurisdiction and inspectors general at key 
agencies—particularly the Departments of Commerce, Defense, T reasury, and State and 
the Intelligence Community—should identify technology controls as a top oversight pri -
ority. T o rally the oversight community, the Government Accountability Office should 
add technology controls to its High Risk List of federal activities “with vulnerabilities 
to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement, or in need of transformation.” 446 The list 
already includes entries for “Ensuring the Effective Protection of T echnologies Critical 
to U.S. National Security Interests” and “Ensuring the Cybersecurity of the Nation,” but 
those categories do not capture the full scope of government activities and policy objec -
tives at issue.
CASE STUDIES
Huawei and ZTE. The T rump administration’s early actions against Huawei and ZTE 
helped to correct what had been relatively lax attitudes toward Chinese technology threats 
at leading U.S. universities. During T rump’s first two years in office, U.S. officials strug -
gled to persuade American universities to impose heightened scrutiny on technology col -
laboration with China. This changed in 2019, when Huawei was indicted on multiple 
federal charges and ZTE remained under several high-profile investigations. In response 
to these developments, prominent universities—including the Massachusetts Institute of 
T echnology (MIT), Stanford, and the University of California, Berkeley—froze new col -
laboration with both Chinese companies. 447 MIT went further, instituting a “new review 
process for ‘elevated-risk’ international proposals” involving China (as well as Russia and 
The development of China-related 
technology controls should adhere 
to regularized procedures and 
get special attention from federal 
oversight elements.

===== PDF_PAGE 132 =====
JON BATEMAN 119 
Saudi Arabia). These university actions were responsible, well-tailored, and long overdue. 
They might not have happened without government pressure.
TikT ok. In contrast, T rump’s actions against TikT ok were badly tainted by the appearance 
of improper motives and methods. T rump sought to ban the app during a hard-fought 
presidential election campaign in which he sought to frame Joe Biden as weak on China. 
There is reasonable speculation that T rump’s ban was prompted in part by personal con -
versations with Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg, whose platform not only competes with 
TikT ok but also served as a critical component of T rump’s electioneering infrastructure.448 
T rump then ordered TikT ok’s owners to sell the company to an American firm based on the 
recommendation of CFIUS.449 Rejecting the bids seen by outside observers as most viable, 
he instead chose Oracle, whose leaders were political supporters.450
These red flags might have been dismissible if T rump’s TikT ok actions were otherwise well-
grounded in a legitimate policymaking process. But the executive orders lacked meaningful 
detail, and their implementation had to be repeatedly delayed. A federal court later found 
the ban to be legally questionable and prevented it from coming into effect, before Biden 
eventually reversed it.451
KEY OFFENSIVE POLICIES
If U.S. leaders want to look strong on China, they should support some of the many nonre-
strictive policies highlighted throughout this report, each of which would help protect U.S. 
national security, economic prosperity, and values in the face of serious challenges from 
Beijing. Meanwhile, U.S. officials should focus on sharing factual, responsible assessments 
of Chinese technology threats with American businesses, universities, and the public. Many 
private stakeholders are clear-eyed about these threats and want detailed, actionable infor -
mation from the government.
At the same time, Washington must be careful not to exaggerate China tech threats. The 
overheated rhetoric of the T rump administration did much to damage the U.S. govern -
ment’s credibility on this issue and inflame public opinion. T o reverse these trends, the 
Biden administration must be prepared to listen as much as talk—to hear directly from 
private stakeholders about what they see as the costs and benefits of U.S.-China technologi-
cal decoupling and governmental technology controls.

===== PDF_PAGE 133 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 134 =====
121 
CONCLUSION
U.S.-China technological decoupling is extraordinarily complex, yet American strategy and 
policy debates are too often simplistic and vague. This report has sought to clarify how 
decoupling in a host of different technology areas could affect the gamut of American in -
terests. Even so, reality is orders of magnitude more intricate and dynamic than what can 
be presented here. Washington must account for the decisions of dozens of other countries 
involved in the global tech trade, and it must make sound policy choices while the U.S. po-
litical system continues to deteriorate—to name just two enormous challenges that deserve 
far more analysis.
Complexity and uncertainty are key reasons to pursue a centrist strategy that can hedge 
against multiple futures. By imposing focused, carefully designed technology restrictions, 
U.S. decisionmakers can conserve their most critical resources: time to assess the situation, 
and control over the decoupling process. This report has offered a concrete picture of what 
centrist decoupling might look like and how implementation could work at the agency 
level. It has also demonstrated several points 
that further bolster the case for a centrist ap -
proach to decoupling.
First, the most strategically significant tech -
nologies (like 5G telecommunications equip-
ment and semiconductors) are few in number 
and already subject to strong U.S. govern -
ment controls. A handful of technology areas 
Focused, carefully designed 
technology restrictions can help 
U.S. decisionmakers conserve their 
most critical resources: time to 
assess the situation, and control 
over the decoupling process.

===== PDF_PAGE 135 =====
122 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
may need tighter China-oriented restrictions—for example, drone swarms, the U.S. bulk 
power system, and technologies sold to Xinjiang. Yet certain China-focused controls seem 
counterproductive in a number of other high-profile areas, such as geolocation data, social 
media platforms, and consumer devices like smartphones. While future circumstances may 
justify increased decoupling, U.S. technology controls should not be greatly expanded at 
this time.
Second, official U.S. policy goals remain dangerously vague and open-ended across the 
board. Washington must publicly clarify its vision for the global tech trade and set more 
achievable ambitions for countering techno-authoritarianism, maintaining a military edge 
over China, and preventing Chinese espionage, sabotage, and influence operations. These 
are all important U.S. interests, but none would currently justify broad-based technology 
controls. Even so, U.S. rhetoric and policy actions continue to suggest the possibility of a 
costly and quixotic expansion of China-oriented controls. Clearer, narrower public messag-
ing by U.S. leaders would help to focus agencies on those problems they can realistically 
address with restrictive tools and reduce the motivation of China and others to seize control 
of the decoupling process.
Third, “offensive” (self-improvement) policies have the greatest long-term potential for 
strengthening American technology leadership, competitiveness, and resilience. Granted, 
many offensive policies face substantial hurdles to implementation. The United States has 
so far lacked the political will to accelerate transformation of its military forces, create na -
tional cybersecurity and data privacy standards, or begin to repair the domestic information 
ecosystem—just as the centrists fear. But failure to enact these and other needed reforms 
would mean wasting the extra time that “defensive” measures can provide, placing U.S. 
security and prosperity at risk. Perhaps the rise of a formidable state rival such as China can 
finally persuade American leaders to take on fundamental challenges at home.
Not everyone will endorse a centrist strategy for technological decoupling or the specific 
policies recommended here. Some may doubt whether a comprehensive strategy is possible 
or even useful. But all should agree that the United States needs sharper public debates on 
this critical set of challenges. If nothing else, U.S. officials and analysts should confront the 
hardest questions head-on. What kind of technological future does America hope to create? 
And how can the tools of government policy help to bring about such a world? U.S. nation-
al strength and well-being will depend, in large part, on how American leaders answer these 
questions in the years to come. They must act carefully. But first, they must think clearly.

===== PDF_PAGE 136 =====
123 
NOTES
FOREWORD
1 From the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence homepage at https://www.nscai.gov/.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
2 “Technological decoupling” is a contested and sometimes politically charged phrase. In its strongest 
form, it can mean a total technological divorce between the United States and China—a very grave 
prospect currently favored only by a few radical voices. In its weaker form, it can refer more generally 
to the kind of marginal reduction of technological interdependence seen for the last several years. This 
report uses the latter meaning. Although “decoupling” can carry conflicting and at times misleading 
meanings, no other single term has yet managed to displace it in common usage.
 This report is about the decoupling of “technology.” It does not focus on the range of other sectors (such 
as medical supplies, finance, entertainment, agriculture, and real estate) where U.S. analysts or officials 
have also proposed some partial decoupling from China. That said, “technology” is an elusive concept. 
While policymakers often speak of a distinct “tech sector” (which they sometimes equate with “Silicon 
Valley”), the truth is that every commercial sector employs, adapts, and develops technologies. Hence, 
loose talk of “technological decoupling” can often be confusing or misleading. Policymakers need more 
precise analysis of specific technology-related U.S. interests and objectives, as this report seeks to provide.
 Within the broad category of technology, this report focuses mainly on digitally oriented technologies, 
whose major value stems from software, data, communications, and networks. Examples include machine 
learning systems, social media platforms, and large data caches. These raise particularly acute policy 
dilemmas, such as how to distinguish between dual-use applications and how to manage globalized 
supply chains and information flows. The report also addresses mixed digital-physical technologies, 
where hardware innovation is a crucial source of value; these include semiconductors, drones, and 
telecommunications equipment. However, highly physically oriented technologies—like nuclear reactors, 
advanced materials, and hypersonics—are not an explicit focus.
 Finally, this report is concerned both with finished technology (end products and services) and with 
technology inputs. The latter includes elements of what is called “the supply chain,” such as technology 
components, raw materials, data, know-how, and human capital that flow between the United States and 
China. It also includes financial support. U.S. and Chinese actors have each made significant investments 
in the other country’s tech companies, and U.S. and Chinese tech companies receive significant revenue 
from sales to the other country’s home markets. These financial flows can be as important as the supply 
chain itself, or even more so, and have become a major policy battleground.

===== PDF_PAGE 137 =====
124 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
THE EVOLUTION OF U.S. THINKING AND POLICY
3 See endnote 2 for a discussion of this term and how it relates to this report’s scope.
4 A 2005 speech by then deputy secretary of state Robert Zoellick crystallized this viewpoint, which 
was already widely held and would continue to hold sway into the Obama administration. Robert B. 
Zoellick, “Whither China: From Membership to Responsibility?,” State Department, September 21, 
2005, https://2001-2009.state.gov/s/d/former/zoellick/rem/53682.htm .
5 Zoellick himself recognized these concerns in a 2019 speech, though he opposed the “logic of constant 
confrontation” that had come to characterize Washington’s China policy. Robert B. Zoellick, “Can 
America and China Be Stakeholders?,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, December 4, 2019, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/2019/12/04/can-america-and-china-be-stakeholders-pub-80510 .
6 Jack Goldsmith and Stuart Russell, “Strengths Become Vulnerabilities: How a Digital World 
Disadvantages the United States in Its International Relations,” June 5, 2018, Hoover Institution, Aegis 
Series Paper no. 1806, June 5, 2018, https://www.hoover.org/sites/default/files/research/docs/381100534-
strengths-become-vulnerabilities.pdf .
7 For a notable executive branch action, see “President Obama Blocks Chinese Acquisition of Aixtron 
SE,” Covington & Burling, December 5, 2016, https://www.cov.com/-/media/files/corporate/
publications/2016/12/president_obama_blocks_chinese_acquisition_of_aixtron_se.pdf . In Congress, 
a 2012 committee report on Huawei and ZTE became a touchstone for future scrutiny of these 
companies and Chinese technology more generally. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, 
Investigative Report on the U.S. National Security Issues Posed by Chinese Telecommunications Companies 
Huawei and ZTE , October 8, 2021, https://republicans-intelligence.house.gov/sites/intelligence.house.
gov/files/documents/huawei-zte%20investigative%20report%20(final).pdf .
8 Seth Center and Emma Bates, “Tech-Politik: Historical Perspectives on Innovation, Technology, and 
Strategic Competition,” CSIS, December 19, 2019, https://www.csis.org/analysis/tech-politik-historical-
perspectives-innovation-technology-and-strategic-competition .
9 James L. Schoff, “U.S.-Japan Technology Policy Coordination: Balancing Technonationalism 
With a Globalized World,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, June 29, 2020, https://
carnegieendowment.org/2020/06/29/u.s.-japan-technology-policy-coordination-balancing-
technonationalism-with-globalized-world-pub-82176 .
10 Adam Kline and Tim Hwang, “From Cold War Sanctions to Weaponized Interdependence: An 
Annotated Bibliography on Competition and Control Over Emerging Technologies,” Center for Security 
and Emerging Technology, September 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/from-cold-war-
sanctions-to-weaponized-interdependence/ .
11 Eric Zhu and Tom Orlik, “When Will China Rule the World? Maybe Never,” Bloomberg, July 5, 
2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2021-07-05/when-will-china-s-economy-beat-the-
u-s-to-become-no-1-why-it-may-never-happen; World Bank, “GDP (Current US$) - United States, 
China, Japan,” https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?locations=US-CN-JP ; and 
Marc Trachtenberg, “Assessing Soviet Economic Performance During the Cold War: A Failure of 
Intelligence?,” Texas National Security Review 1, no. 2 (2018), https://tnsr.org/2018/02/assessing-soviet-
economic-performance-cold-war/ .
12 “Population Total - China, Japan, United States,” World Bank, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SP.POP.TOTL?locations=CN-JP-US; and Murray Feshbach, “The Soviet Union: Population Trends and 
Dilemmas,” Population Bulletin 37, no. 3 (1982), https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12264357/.
13 Ellen Terrell, “When a Quote Is Not (Exactly) a Quote: General Motors,” Inside Adams (blog), Library 
of Congress, April 22, 2016, https://blogs.loc.gov/inside_adams/2016/04/when-a-quote-is-not-exactly-a-
quote-general-motors/.
14 John Chipman, “Why Your Company Needs a Foreign Policy,” Harvard Business Review , September 
2016, https://hbr.org/2016/09/why-your-company-needs-a-foreign-policy.
15 Jon Bateman, “National Security in an Age of Insurrection,” Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, January 14, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/01/14/national-security-in-age-of-
insurrection-pub-83635.

===== PDF_PAGE 138 =====
JON BATEMAN 125 
16 David Forscey, Jon Bateman, Nick Beecroft, and Beau Woods, “Systemic Cyber Risk: A Primer,” 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and Aspen Institute, March 7, 2022, https://
carnegieendowment.org/2022/03/07/systemic-cyber-risk-primer-pub-86531 .
17 Raj Varadarajan et al., “What’s at Stake If the US and China Really Decouple,” Boston Consulting 
Group, October 20, 2020, https://www.bcg.com/fr-ca/publications/2020/high-stakes-of-decoupling-us-
and-china .
18 This primer is necessarily a snapshot in time, accurate as of March 27, 2022, unless stated otherwise. The 
U.S. government debuts new policy actions targeting Chinese technology on an almost weekly basis.
19 Federal regulations reveal some basic outlines of licensing policy, such as 15 C.F.R. § 742 for the CCL. 
However, they leave substantial room for interpretation.
20 50 U.S.C. § 4811.
21 50 U.S.C. § 4811(3).
22 Ian F. Fergusson and Karen M. Sutter, “U.S. Export Control Reforms and China: Issues for Congress,” 
Congressional Research Service, January 15, 2021, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/IF11627.pdf.
23 22 C.F.R. § 121.1.
24 “International Traffic in Arms Regulations: U.S. Munitions List Categories I, II, and III,” 
State Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 3819, (March 9, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/01/23/2020-00574/international-traffic-in-arms-regulations-us-munitions-list-
categories-i-ii-and-iii .
25 “International Traffic in Arms Regulations: U.S. Munitions List Categories I, II, and III,” 
State Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 3819, (March 9, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/01/23/2020-00574/international-traffic-in-arms-regulations-us-munitions-list-
categories-i-ii-and-iii .
26 22 C.F.R. § 126.1(d)(1).
27 “2021 Hong Kong Policy Act Report,” State Department, March 31, 2021, https://www.state.gov/2021-
hong-kong-policy-act-report/.
28 15 C.F.R. § 730.3.
29 15 C.F.R. Supplement No. 1 to Part 738.
30 “Export Administration Regulations: Amendments to General Prohibition Three (Foreign-Produced 
Direct Product Rule) and the Entity List,” Commerce Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 29,849 (March 19, 
2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/05/19/2020-10856/export-administration-
regulations-amendments-to-general-prohibition-three-foreign-produced-direct .
31 “China - Country Commercial Guide - U.S. Export Controls,” U.S. International Trade Commission 
(USITC), September 14, 2021, https://www.trade.gov/knowledge-product/china-us-export-controls .
32 15 C.F.R. § 744.21; and John R. Shane and Lori E. Scheetz, “Commerce Department Further Restricts 
U.S. Exports to China, Russia, and Venezuela; Aims to Combat China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,” 
Wiley, April 28, 2020, https://www.wiley.law/alert-Commerce-Department-Further-Restricts-U-S-
Exports-to-China-Russia-and-Venezuela-Aims-to-Combat-China-s-Military-Civil-Fusion-Strategy .
33 Emphasis added. 15 C.F.R. § 744.21(g).
34 Sylwia A. Lis, Lise S. Test, and Maria Sergeyeva, “Commerce Tightens Restrictions on Technology 
Exports to Countries of Concern, in Particular China, Russia, and Venezuela,” Sanctions & Export 
Controls Update (blog), Baker McKenzie, April 30, 2020, https://sanctionsnews.bakermckenzie.com/
commerce-tightens-restrictions-on-technology-exports-to-countries-of-concern-in-particular-china-
russia-and-venezuela/ .
35 “Military End User (MEU) List,” Commerce Department, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/policy-
guidance/lists-of-parties-of-concern/1770 .
36 50 U.S.C. § 4817.
37 “Review of Controls for Certain Emerging Technologies,” Commerce Department, 83 Fed. Reg. 58,201 
(November 19, 2018), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/19/2018-25221/review-of-
controls-for-certain-emerging-technologies ; and Emma Rafaelof, “Unfinished Business: Export Control 
and Foreign Investment Reforms,” U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, June 1,

===== PDF_PAGE 139 =====
126 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-06/Unfinished_Business-Export_Control_and_
Foreign_Investment_Reforms.pdf .
38 “New Controls on Emerging Technologies Released, While U.S. Commerce Department Comes Under 
Fire for Delay,” Gibson Dunn, October 27, 2020, https://www.gibsondunn.com/new-controls-on-
emerging-technologies-released-while-us-commerce-department-comes-under-fire-for-delay/ .
39 15 C.F.R. § 744.16.
40 15 C.F.R. § 734.3.
41 As of March 27, 2022, based on author’s analysis of the Commerce Department’s Entity List spreadsheet 
available at https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/consolidated-entity-list/1072-el-2 . These 
figures include both China and Hong Kong. They exclude all entries with exact duplicate names; 
however, they include entries for close variations of names, aliases, subsidiaries, and affiliates. Undated 
entries were assumed to predate 2018.
42 15 C.F.R. § 734.3(a).
43 15 C.F.R. § 734.4.
44 15 C.F.R. § 736.2(b)(3).
45 Charles L. Capito, Panagiotis C. Bayz, and Joseph A. Benkert, “The Commerce Department Modifies 
‘Direct Product Rule’ to Restrict Transfers of More Foreign-Made Items to Huawei,” Morrison Foerster, 
May 28, 2020, https://www.mofo.com/resources/insights/200529-commerce-department-modifies.html .
46 “Addition of Huawei Non-U.S. Affiliates to the Entity List, the Removal of Temporary General 
License, and Amendments to General Prohibition Three (Foreign-Produced Direct Product Rule),” 
Commerce Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 51,596 (August 20, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/08/20/2020-18213/addition-of-huawei-non-us-affiliates-to-the-entity-list-the-
removal-of-temporary-general-license-and ; and “Export Administration Regulations: Amendments 
to General Prohibition Three (Foreign-Produced Direct Product Rule) and the Entity List,” 
Commerce Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 29,849 (May 15, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/05/19/2020-10856/export-administration-regulations-amendments-to-general-
prohibition-three-foreign-produced-direct .
47 15 C.F.R. § 736.2(e); 15 C.F.R. Supplement No. 4 to Part 744, footnote 1; and “Commerce Addresses 
Huawei’s Efforts to Undermine Entity List, Restricts Products Designed and Produced With U.S. 
Technologies,” press release, Commerce Department, May 15, 2020, https://2017-2021.commerce.gov/
news/press-releases/2020/05/commerce-addresses-huaweis-efforts-undermine-entity-list-restricts.html ; 
Kay C. Georgi, Marwa M. Hassoun, Sylvia G. Costelloe, and Aman Kakar, “BIS Expands the Huawei 
Foreign Direct Product Rule to Capture a Wide Swath of COTS Products,” Arent Fox, August 19, 2020, 
https://www.arentfox.com/perspectives/alerts/bis-expands-the-huawei-foreign-direct-product-rule-
capture-wide-swath-cots .
48 “Comments of the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) on Amendments to General Prohibition 
Three (Foreign-Produced Direct Product Rule) and the Entity List,” Semiconductor Industry 
Association, July 14, 2020, https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/SIA-
Comments-on-Foreign-Direct-Product-July-14-2020.pdf.
49 “Export Control Licensing Decisions for Huawei (November 9, 2020-April 20, 2021),” Commerce 
Department, https://gop-foreignaffairs.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Huawei-Licensing-
Information.pdf.
50 “Addition of Huawei Non-U.S. Affiliates to the Entity List, the Removal of Temporary General 
License, and Amendments to General Prohibition Three (Foreign-Produced Direct Product Rule),” 
Commerce Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 51,596 (August 20, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/08/20/2020-18213/addition-of-huawei-non-us-affiliates-to-the-entity-list-the-removal-
of-temporary-general-license-and .
51 Evan Burke, “Trump-Era Policies Toward Chinese STEM Talent: A Need for Better Balance,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, March 25, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/25/
trump-era-policies-toward-chinese-stem-talent-need-for-better-balance-pub-84137 .
52 Evan Burke, “Trump-Era Policies Toward Chinese STEM Talent: A Need for Better Balance,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, March 25, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/25/
trump-era-policies-toward-chinese-stem-talent-need-for-better-balance-pub-84137 .

===== PDF_PAGE 140 =====
JON BATEMAN 127 
53 “2019 Statistical Analysis of BIS Licensing Deemed Export 2015-2019,” Commerce Department, April 
25, 2020, https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/country-papers/2648-2019-statistical-aalysis-of-bis-
licensing-deemed-export-2015-2019/file.
54 What counts as an “American” or “foreign” investor or business is a complicated and increasingly 
contested legal question. For example, see Brandon L. Van Grack and James Brower, “CFIUS’s 
Expanding Jurisdiction in the Magnachip Acquisition,” Lawfare, October 11, 2021, https://www.
lawfareblog.com/cfiuss-expanding-jurisdiction-magnachip-acquisition .
55 31 C.F.R. § 800.101, 800.601.
56 Farhad Jalinous, Karalyn Mildorf, Keith Schomig, and Ata Akiner, “CFIUS Finalizes New FIRRMA 
Regulations,” White & Case, https://www.whitecase.com/publications/alert/cfius-finalizes-new-firrma-
regulations .
57 David Mortlock, Noman Goheer, and Ahmad El-Gamal, “Expanded CFIUS Jurisdiction Under 
FIRRMA Regulations: An Overview,” Wilkie Farr & Gallagher, May 19, 2020, https://www.willkie.
com/-/media/files/publications/2020/05/expandedcfiusjurisdictionunderfirrmaregulations.pdf .
58 James K. Jackson and Cathleen D. Cimino-Isaacs, “CFIUS Reform Under FIRRMA,” Congressional 
Research Service, February 21, 2020, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/natsec/IF10952.pdf.
59 “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2020,” Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States 
(CFIUS), July 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/206/CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2020.
pdf.
60 Harry Clark, Gregory Hume, and Jeanine McGuinness, “President Trump Orders Divestment of U.S. 
Company; CFIUS Clears Semiconductor Transaction,” JD Supra, March 16, 2020, https://www.jdsupra.
com/legalnews/president-trump-orders-divestment-of-u-12562/ .
61 “Statement by Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin on the President’s Decision Regarding the Acquisition by 
ByteDance Ltd. of the U.S. Business of musical.ly,” Treasury Department, August 14, 2020, https://
home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm1094 .
62 Greg Roumeliotis, “U.S. Blocks MoneyGram Sale to China’s Ant Financial on National Security 
Concerns, Reuters, January 2, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-moneygram-intl-m-a-
ant-financial/u-s-blocks-moneygram-sale-to-chinas-ant-financial-on-national-security-concerns-
idUSKBN1ER1R7.
63 “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2020,” CFIUS, July 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/system/
files/206/CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2020.pdf ; and “Annual Report to Congress for CY 2019,” 
CFIUS, July 2020, https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/206/CFIUS-Public-Annual-Report-CY-2019.
pdf.
64 Thilo Hanemann, Daniel H. Rosen, Mark Witzke, Steve Bennion, and Emma Smith, “Two-Way Street: 
2021 Update US-China Investment Trends,” Rhodium Group, May 2021, https://rhg.com/wp-content/
uploads/2021/05/RHG_TWS-2021_Full-Report_Final.pdf ; and Andres B. Schwarzenberg and Karen 
M. Sutter, “U.S.-China Investment Ties: Overview,” Congressional Research Service, January 15, 2021, 
https://sgp.fas.org/crs/row/IF11283.pdf.
65 Jake Sullivan, “Remarks by National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan at the National Security 
Commission on Artificial Intelligence Global Emerging Technology Summit,” White House, July 13, 
2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/nsc/briefing-room/2021/07/13/remarks-by-national-security-advisor-
jake-sullivan-at-the-national-security-commission-on-artificial-intelligence-global-emerging-technology-
summit/; Thilo Hanemann et al., “An Outbound Investment Screening Regime for the United States?,” 
Rhodium Group, January 2022, https://rhg.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/RHG_TWS_2022_US-
Outbound-Investment.pdf ; and Sarah Bauerle-Danzman, “Is the US Going to Screen Outbound 
Investment?,” Atlantic Council, January 10, 2022, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/econographics/
is-the-us-going-to-screen-outbound-investment/ .
66 Executive Order 14032, “Addressing the Threat From Securities Investments That Finance Certain 
Companies of the People’s Republic of China,” June 3, 2021, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/06/07/2021-12019/addressing-the-threat-from-securities-investments-that-finance-
certain-companies-of-the-peoples .
67 As of March 27, 2022, based on author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Sanctions List Search 
and Consolidated Sanctions List (Non-SDN Lists) spreadsheet (primary names) available at https://

===== PDF_PAGE 141 =====
128 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/ and https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/
consolidated-sanctions-list-non-sdn-lists . This figure includes some duplication for companies listed two 
or more times under aliases or closely related entities.
68 “President Biden Revamps Communist Chinese Military Companies (CCMC) Sanctions Program,” 
Paul, Weiss, June 7, 2021, https://www.paulweiss.com/practices/litigation/economic-sanctions-aml/
publications/president-biden-revamps-communist-chinese-military-companies-ccmc-sanctions-
program?id=40293.
69 Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act, Public Law No. 116-222 (2020), https://www.govinfo.
gov/content/pkg/PLAW-116publ222/pdf/PLAW-116publ222.pdf.
70 “Rule Governing Board Determinations Under the Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act,” 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), September 22, 2021, https://pcaob-assets.
azureedge.net/pcaob-dev/docs/default-source/rulemaking/docket048/2021-004-hfcaa-adopting-release.
pdf?sfvrsn=f6dfb7f8_4 .
71 As of March 27, 2022, 225 China- and Hong Kong-based companies had filed audit reports in the 
last year, according to PCAOB: “Audit Reports Issued by PCAOB-Registered Firms Located Where 
Authorities Deny Access to Conduct Inspections,” PCAOB, https://pcaobus.org/oversight/international/
denied-access-to-inspections . See also “Chinese Companies Listed on Major U.S. Stock Exchanges,” 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, May 5, 2021, https://www.uscc.gov/sites/
default/files/2021-05/Chinese_Companies_on_US_Stock_Exchanges_5-2021.pdf . The SEC estimated 
that about 10 percent of companies affected by the new law would have over-the-counter or unlisted 
securities. “Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act Disclosure,” SEC, 86 Fed. Reg. 70,027 
(December 9, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/12/09/2021-26528/holding-
foreign-companies-accountable-act-disclosure .
72 Robert Schmidt and Benjamin Bain, “SEC Chief Warns ‘Clock Is Ticking’ on Delisting Chinese 
Stocks,” Bloomberg, August 25, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-08-25/sec-chief-
warns-clock-is-ticking-on-delisting-chinese-stocks?sref=QmOxnLFz .
73 Senator John Kennedy, “Senate Passes Kennedy Bill to Strengthen America’s Protection Against 
Fraudulent Foreign Companies,” press release, June 22, 2021, https://www.kennedy.senate.gov/
public/2021/6/senate-passes-kennedy-bill-to-strengthen-america-s-protection-against-fraudulent-foreign-
companies; and H.R. 4521, The America COMPETES Act of 2022, § 60301, https://rules.house.gov/
sites/democrats.rules.house.gov/files/BILLS-117HR4521RH-RCP117-31.pdf.
74 47 U.S.C. § 214; and 47 C.F.R. § 63.18.
75 “Order on Revocation of China Unicom Americas’ Sec. 214 Authority,” Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), March 17, 2021, https://www.fcc.gov/document/order-revocation-china-unicom-
americas-sec-214-authority.
76 47 U.S.C. §§ 34-35; and Executive Order 10530, “Providing for the Performance of Certain Functions 
Vested in or Subject to the Approval of the President,” 19 Fed. Reg. 2,709 (May 10, 1954), https://www.
archives.gov/federal-register/codification/executive-order/10530.html .
77 “Order on Revocation of China Unicom Americas’ Sec. 214 Authority,” FCC, March 17, 2021, https://
www.fcc.gov/document/order-revocation-china-unicom-americas-sec-214-authority ; and “Order on 
Revocation/Termination: Pacific Networks/ComNet 214 Authority,” FCC, March 17, 2021, https://docs.
fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-21-38A1.pdf.
78 Executive Order 13913, “Establishing the Committee for the Assessment of Foreign Participation in 
the United States Telecommunications Services Sector,” April 4, 2020, https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2020/04/08/2020-07530/establishing-the-committee-for-the-assessment-of-foreign-
participation-in-the-united-states ; and “The Committee for the Assessment of Foreign Participation 
in the United States Telecommunications Services Sector – Frequently Asked Questions,” Justice 
Department, December 7, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/nsd/committee-assessment-foreign-
participation-united-states-telecommunications-services-sector .
79 “FCC Denies China Mobile Telecom Services Application,” FCC, May 9, 2019, https://www.fcc.gov/
document/fcc-denies-china-mobile-telecom-services-application-0 . For an overview, see Adam Chan, 
“CFIUS, Team Telecom and China,” Lawfare, September 28, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/cfius-
team-telecom-and-china .

===== PDF_PAGE 142 =====
JON BATEMAN 129 
80 “FCC Denies China Mobile Telecom Services Application,” FCC, May 9, 2019, https://www.fcc.gov/
document/fcc-denies-china-mobile-telecom-services-application-0 ; “China Telecom Americas Order 
on Revocation and Termination,” FCC, October 26, 2021, https://www.fcc.gov/document/china-
telecom-americas-order-revocation-and-termination ; “FCC Revokes China Unicom Americas’ Telecom 
Services Authority,” press release, FCC, January 27, 2022, https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-revokes-
china-unicom-americas-telecom-services-authority ; and “FCC Revokes Pacific Networks’ & ComNet’s 
Telecom Service Authority,” press release, FCC, March 16, 2022, https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-
revokes-pacific-networks-comnets-telecom-service-authority .
81 “Team Telecom Recommends That the FCC Deny Pacific Light Cable Network System’s Hong Kong 
Undersea Cable Connection to the United States,” press release, Justice Department, June 17, 2020, 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/team-telecom-recommends-fcc-deny-pacific-light-cable-network-system-
s-hong-kong-undersea.
82 Daphne Leprince-Ringuet, “Facebook and Google Drop Plans for Underwater Cable to Hong Kong 
After Security Warnings,” ZDNet, September 1, 2020, https://www.zdnet.com/article/facebook-and-
google-drop-plans-for-underwater-cable-to-hong-kong-after-security-warnings/ ; and Adam Chan, 
“CFIUS, Team Telecom and China,” Lawfare, September 28, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/cfius-
team-telecom-and-china .
83 “Equipment Authorization – RF Device,” FCC, https://www.fcc.gov/oet/ea/rfdevice .
84 Joel Griffin, “FCC Moves One Step Closer to Banning Hikvision, Dahua Products,” SecurityInfoWatch.
com, June 17, 2021, https://www.securityinfowatch.com/video-surveillance/article/21227289/fcc-moves-
one-step-closer-to-banning-hikvision-dahua-products .
85 Joel Griffin, “FCC Moves One Step Closer to Banning Hikvision, Dahua Products,” SecurityInfoWatch.
com, June 17, 2021, https://www.securityinfowatch.com/video-surveillance/article/21227289/fcc-
moves-one-step-closer-to-banning-hikvision-dahua-products ; and “Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and 
Notice of Inquiry, Protecting Against National Security Threats to the Communications Supply Chain 
Through the Equipment Authorization Program; Protecting Against National Security Threats to the 
Communications Supply Chain through the Competitive Bidding Program,” FCC, ET Docket Nos. 21-
232 and 21-233, https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-372818A1.pdf .
86 47 U.S.C. § 302a; and 47 C.F.R. § 2.915.
87 “List of Equipment and Services Covered By Section 2 of The Secure Networks Act,” FCC, https://www.
fcc.gov/supplychain/coveredlist .
88 47 U.S.C. § 1601(c); and John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, 
Public Law No. 115-232, § 889(f)(3)(A-B).
89 Secure Equipment Act of 2021, Public Law No. 117-55.
90 “List of Equipment and Services Covered By Section 2 of The Secure Networks Act,” FCC, https://www.
fcc.gov/supplychain/coveredlist .
91 “Citing National Security Risks, Carr Calls for Starting Process of Adding DJI—a Chinese Drone 
Company—to FCC’s Covered List,” press release, FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr, October 19, 2021, 
https://www.fcc.gov/document/carr-calls-review-dji-citing-national-security-risks .
92 8 U.S.C. § 1182(a)(3)(C).
93 “U.S. Imposes Visa Restrictions on Certain Employees of Chinese Technology Companies That Abuse 
Human Rights,” State Department, July 15, 2020, https://2017-2021.state.gov/u-s-imposes-visa-
restrictions-on-certain-employees-of-chinese-technology-companies-that-abuse-human-rights/index.
html.
94 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f).
95 Ben Harrington and Theresa A. Reiss, “Presidential Actions to Exclude Aliens Under INA § 212(f),” 
Congressional Research Service, May 4, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/LSB/
LSB10458.
96 Proclamation 10043, “Suspension of Entry as Nonimmigrants of Certain Students and 
Researchers From the People’s Republic of China,” May 29, 2020, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/06/04/2020-12217/suspension-of-entry-as-nonimmigrants-of-certain-students-and-
researchers-from-the-peoples-republic .

===== PDF_PAGE 143 =====
130 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
97 Humeyra Pamuk, “U.S. Revokes More Than 1,000 Visas of Chinese Nationals, Citing Military Links,” 
Reuters, September 9, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-visas-students/u-s-revokes-
more-than-1000-visas-of-chinese-nationals-citing-military-links-idUSKBN26039D ; and Stuart 
Anderson, “Biden Keeps Costly Trump Visa Policy Denying Chinese Grad Students,” Forbes, August 10, 
2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/stuartanderson/2021/08/10/biden-keeps-costly-trump-visa-policy-
denying-chinese-grad-students/ .
98 Remco Zwetsloot, Emily Weinstein, and Ryan Fedasiuk, “Assessing the Scope of U.S. Visa Restrictions 
on Chinese Students,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, February 2021, https://cset.
georgetown.edu/publication/assessing-the-scope-of-u-s-visa-restrictions-on-chinese-students/ .
99 For an overview, see Evan Burke, “Trump-Era Policies Toward Chinese STEM Talent: A Need for Better 
Balance,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 25, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.
org/2021/03/25/trump-era-policies-toward-chinese-stem-talent-need-for-better-balance-pub-84137 ; and 
Evan Burke, “The Right Way to Bring Chinese STEM Talent Back to the U.S.,” ChinaFile, April 27, 
2021, https://www.chinafile.com/reporting-opinion/viewpoint/right-way-bring-chinese-stem-talent-back-
us.
100 “Establishing a Fixed Time Period of Admission and an Extension of Stay Procedure for Nonimmigrant 
Academic Students, Exchange Visitors, and Representatives of Foreign Information Media,” Department 
of Homeland Security, 85 Fed. Reg. 60,526 (September 25, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/09/25/2020-20845/establishing-a-fixed-time-period-of-admission-and-an-extension-of-
stay-procedure-for-nonimmigrant .
101 “Strengthening Wage Protections for the Temporary and Permanent Employment of Certain Aliens 
in the United States,” Department of Labor, 86 Fed. Reg. 3,608 (January 14, 2021), https://www.
federalregister.gov/documents/2021/01/14/2021-00218/strengthening-wage-protections-for-the-
temporary-and-permanent-employment-of-certain-aliens-in-the .
102 Proclamation 10052, “Suspension of Entry of Immigrants and Nonimmigrants Who Present a 
Risk to the United States Labor Market During the Economic Recovery Following the 2019 Novel 
Coronavirus Outbreak,” 85 Fed. Reg. 38,263 (June 22, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/06/25/2020-13888/suspension-of-entry-of-immigrants-and-nonimmigrants-who-
present-a-risk-to-the-united-states-labor .
103 Evan Burke, “Trump-Era Policies Toward Chinese STEM Talent: A Need for Better Balance,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, March 25, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/25/
trump-era-policies-toward-chinese-stem-talent-need-for-better-balance-pub-84137 .
104 “Establishing a Fixed Time Period of Admission and an Extension of Stay Procedure for Nonimmigrant 
Academic Students, Exchange Visitors, and Representatives of Foreign Information Media,” 
Department of Homeland Security, 86 Fed. Reg. 35,410 (July 6, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/07/06/2021-13929/establishing-a-fixed-time-period-of-admission-and-an-extension-of-
stay-procedure-for-nonimmigrant ; “Biden Admin Proposes 18-Month Delay in Calculating Prevailing 
Wages of H-1B, Other Visas,” Economic Times, March 24, 2021, https://economictimes.indiatimes.
com/nri/work/biden-admin-proposes-18-month-delay-in-calculating-prevailing-wages-of-h-1b-and-
other-visas/articleshow/81646252.cms; and “Biden Lets Trump Era H-1B Visa Bans Expire; Indian IT 
Professionals to Benefit,” Economic Times, April 1, 2021, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/nri/
work/biden-lets-trump-era-h-1b-visa-bans-expire-indian-it-professionals-to-benefit/articleshow/81813752.
cms.
105 Abby Lemert and Eleanor Runde, “New U.S. Visa Rules Prompt Scrutiny of CCP Members,” Lawfare, 
December 11, 2020, https://www.lawfareblog.com/new-us-visa-rules-prompt-scrutiny-ccp-members .
106 Chad P. Bown and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs, “Will Trump Invoke National Security to Start a Trade 
War?,” Peterson Institute for International Economics (PIIE), July 5, 2017, https://www.piie.com/blogs/
trade-investment-policy-watch/will-trump-invoke-national-security-start-trade-war .
107 19 U.S.C. § 1673.
108 19 U.S.C. § 1671.
109 Chad P. Bown, “Steel, Aluminum, Lumber, Solar: Trump’s Stealth Trade Protection,” PIIE, June 2017, 
https://www.piie.com/system/files/documents/pb17-21.pdf.
110 “Understanding Antidumping & Countervailing Duty Investigations,” USITC, https://www.usitc.gov/
press_room/usad.htm .

===== PDF_PAGE 144 =====
JON BATEMAN 131 
111 19 U.S.C. §§ 1671, 1673.
112 19 U.S.C. § 1337. For a discussion of how Section 337 relates to China, see Yiqing Yin, “Section 337 of 
the Tariff Act of 1930 and Its Impacts on China,” Catholic University Journal of Law and Technology 25, 
no. 2 (2017), https://scholarship.law.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1038&context=jlt .
113 “Certain Two-Way Radio Equipment and Systems, Related Software and Components Thereof; 
Commission Decision to Affirm-in-Part, Modify-in-Part, Reverse-in-Part, and Strike Certain Portions 
of a Final Initial Determination Finding a Violation of Section 337; Issuance of Limited Exclusion 
Order and Cease and Desist Orders; and Termination of the Investigation,” USITC, 83 Fed. Reg. 59,415 
(November 23, 2018), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/23/2018-25463/certain-two-
way-radio-equipment-and-systems-related-software-and-components-thereof-commission .
114 “Federal Indictment Charges PRC-Based Telecommunications Company With Conspiring With Former 
Motorola Solutions Employees to Steal Technology,” press release, Justice Department, February 7, 2022, 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/federal-indictment-charges-prc-based-telecommunications-company-
conspiring-former-motorola.
115 “Certain Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Components Thereof; Final Determination Finding a 
Violation of Section 337 and Issuance of Remedial Orders; Suspension of Enforcement of the Remedial 
Orders Pending Final Resolution of a Final Written Decision by the Patent Trial and Appeal Board; 
and Termination of the Investigation,” USITC, 85 Fed. Reg. 52,640 (August 26, 2020), https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/08/26/2020-18695/certain-unmanned-aerial-vehicles-and-
components-thereof-final-determination-finding-a-violation-of .
116 Qingyu Yin et al., “Latest Development in the DJI-Autel Disputes,” Finnegan, August 24, 2020, 
https://www.finnegan.com/en/insights/ip-updates/latest-development-in-the-dji-autel-disputes.html ; 
“Certain Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Components Thereof; Commission Determination to Institute 
a Rescission Proceeding and Rescind Permanently a Limited Exclusion Order and Cease and Desist 
Orders; Termination of Rescission Proceeding,” USITC, 86 Fed. Reg. 51,676 (August 16, 2021), 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/09/16/2021-19977/certain-unmanned-aerial-vehicles-
and-components-thereof-commission-determination-to-institute-a ; and Ishveena Singh, “DJI, Autel 
Settle Years-Long Patent Dispute Days Before Jury Trial,” DroneDJ, August 19, 2021, https://dronedj.
com/2021/08/19/dji-autel-settle-years-long-patent-dispute-days-before-jury-trial/ .
117 “Anti-dumping, Subsidies, Safeguards: Contingencies, Etc.,” World Trade Organization (WTO), https://
www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/agrm8_e.htm ; and Chad P. Bown, “Steel, Aluminum, 
Lumber, Solar: Trump’s Stealth Trade Protection,” PIIE, June 2017, https://www.piie.com/system/files/
documents/pb17-21.pdf.
118 “DS186: United States — Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930 and Amendments Thereto,” WTO, 
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds186_e.htm ; and Joel W. Rogers and Joseph P. 
Whitlock, “Is Section 337 Consistent With the GATT and the TRIPs Agreement?,” American University 
International Law Review 17, no. 3 (2002), https://digitalcommons.wcl.american.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=1220&context=auilr .
119 For a general overview, see Brock R. Williams et al., “Trump Administration Tariff Actions: Frequently 
Asked Questions,” Congressional Research Service, December 15, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/
product/pdf/R/R45529; and Chad P. Bown and Melina Kolb, “Trump’s Trade War Timeline: An Up-to-
Date Guide,” PIIE, October 31, 2021, https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/trump-trade-
war-timeline.pdf .
120 Another example is Section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974, which authorizes the ITC to investigate surges 
of foreign imports in “such increased quantities” that are or threaten to become “a substantial cause of 
serious injury” to U.S. industry. (The import surge need not be unfair in any way.) A USITC finding then 
allows the President to impose temporary “global safeguards,” such as tariffs or other import restrictions, 
on the imported item from all countries. Trump instituted safeguards for solar panels and washing 
machines, following the first new investigations under this authority since 2001. 19 U.S.C. § 2251; 
“Understanding Safeguard Investigations,” USITC, https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/us_safeguard.
htm; “President Trump Approves Relief for U.S. Washing Machine and Solar Cell Manufacturers,” press 
release, U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), January 22, 2018, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/
press-office/press-releases/2018/january/president-trump-approves-relief-us ; and Chad P. Bown and Junie 
Joseph, “Solar and Washing Machine Safeguards in Context: The History of US Section 201 Use,” PIIE,

===== PDF_PAGE 145 =====
132 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
October 31, 2017, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-and-investment-policy-watch/solar-and-washing-
machine-safeguards-context-history-us .
121 19 U.S.C. § 2411.
122 19 U.S.C. § 2411(c)(3)(B).
123 “Addressing China’s Laws, Policies, Practices, and Actions Related to Intellectual Property, Innovation, 
and Technology,” Presidential Memorandum for the USTR, 82 Fed. Reg. 39,007 (August 14, 2017), 
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/presidential-memorandum-united-states-
trade-representative/.
124 “Findings of the Investigation Into China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, 
Intellectual Property, and Innovation Under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974,” USTR, March 22, 
2018, https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Section%20301%20FINAL.PDF.
125 Chad P. Bown and Melina Kolb, “Trump’s Trade War Timeline: An Up-to-Date Guide,” PIIE, October 
31, 2021, https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/trump-trade-war-timeline.pdf ; Chad P. 
Bown, “US-China Trade War Tariffs: An Up-to-Date Chart,” PIIE, March 16, 2021, https://www.piie.
com/research/piie-charts/us-china-trade-war-tariffs-date-chart ; and Andres B. Schwarzenberg, “Section 
301 of the Trade Act of 1974: Origin, Evolution, and Use,” Congressional Research Service, December 
14, 2020, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R46604.pdf .
126 “USTR Issues Tariffs on Chinese Products in Response to Unfair Trade Practices,” press release, 
USTR, June 15, 2018, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2018/june/ustr-
issues-tariffs-chinese-products ; USTR, “USTR Finalizes Tariffs on $200 Billion of Chinese Imports 
in Response to China’s Unfair Trade Practices,” September 18, 2018, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-
offices/press-office/press-releases/2018/september/ustr-finalizes-tariffs-200 ; and Brock R. Williams et al., 
“Trump Administration Tariff Actions: Frequently Asked Questions,” Congressional Research Service, 
December 15, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45529 .
127 Andres B. Schwarzenberg, “Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974: Origin, Evolution, and Use,” 
Congressional Research Service, December 14, 2020, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R46604.pdf ; and Brock 
R. Williams et al., “Trump Administration Tariff Actions: Frequently Asked Questions,” Congressional 
Research Service, December 15, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45529 .
128 Joseph L. Barloon et al., “USTR Relaunches Exclusion Process for China Section 301 Tariffs,” 
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, October 12, 2021 https://www.skadden.com/insights/
publications/2021/10/ustr-relaunches-exclusion-process .
129 Chad P. Bown and Cathleen Cimino-Isaacs, “Will Trump Invoke National Security to Start a Trade 
War?,” PIIE, July 5, 2017, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-investment-policy-watch/will-trump-invoke-
national-security-start-trade-war .
130 19 U.S.C. § 1862.
131 19 U.S.C. § 1862(d).
132 Chad P. Bown and Melina Kolb, “Trump’s Trade War Timeline: An Up-to-Date Guide,” PIIE, October 
31, 2021, https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/trump-trade-war-timeline.pdf .
133 Chad P. Bown, “Trump’s Long-awaited Steel and Aluminum Tariffs Are Just the Beginning,” PIIE, 
March 26, 2018, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-and-investment-policy-watch/trumps-long-awaited-
steel-and-aluminum-tariffs-are-just ; and Chad P. Bown and Melina Kolb, “Trump’s Trade War Timeline: 
An Up-to-Date Guide,” PIIE, October 31, 2021, https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/
trump-trade-war-timeline.pdf .
134 19 U.S.C. § 1307.
135 “Withhold Release Orders and Findings List,” Customs and Border Protection (CBP), https://www.cbp.
gov/trade/forced-labor/withhold-release-orders-and-findings .
136 “DHS Cracks Down on Goods Produced by China’s State-Sponsored Forced Labor,” press release, CBP, 
September 14, 2020, https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/national-media-release/dhs-cracks-down-goods-
produced-china-s-state-sponsored-forced-labor ; and “The Department of Homeland Security Issues 
Withhold Release Order on Silica-Based Products Made by Forced Labor in Xinjiang,” press release, 
CBP, June 24, 2021, https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/national-media-release/department-homeland-
security-issues-withhold-release-order-silica .

===== PDF_PAGE 146 =====
JON BATEMAN 133 
137 Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act of 2021, Public Law No. 117-78, § 3, https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/PLAW-117publ78/pdf/PLAW-117publ78.pdf.
138 “Sanctions Programs and Country Information,” Treasury Department, https://home.treasury.gov/
policy-issues/financial-sanctions/sanctions-programs-and-country-information .
139 “Reference Sheet on Economic Sanctions,” Brookings Institution, December 2020, https://www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/ReferenceSheet_EconomicSanctions.pdf .
140 50 U.S.C. § 1701.
141 50 U.S.C. § 1701, 1702.
142 As of March 11, 2022. “Declared National Emergencies Under the National Emergencies Act,” Brennan 
Center, December 15, 2021, https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/research-reports/declared-
national-emergencies-under-national-emergencies-act .
143 50 U.S.C. §§ 1601-1651.
144 “Reference Sheet on Economic Sanctions,” Brookings Institution, December 2020, https://www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/ReferenceSheet_EconomicSanctions.pdf .
145 As of March 27, 2022, based on author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Sanctions List Search 
and SDN spreadsheet, available at https://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/ and https://home.treasury.gov/
policy-issues/financial-sanctions/specially-designated-nationals-list-data-formats-data-schemas (primary 
names). Figures exclude all entries with exact duplicate names; however, they may include entries for 
close variations of names, aliases, subsidiaries, and affiliates. “China” here refers to mainland China plus 
Hong Kong and Macau. China-based actors include some third-country entities that maintain a presence 
in China.
146 For the purpose of these figures, China-specific reasons refer to human rights abuses and corruption 
(Executive Order 13818) and Hong Kong repression (Executive Order 13936).
147 “Treasury Sanctions CEIEC for Supporting the Illegitimate Maduro Regime’s Efforts to Undermine 
Venezuelan Democracy,” Treasury Department, November 30, 2020, https://home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm1194.
148 Executive Order 13818, “Blocking the Property of Persons Involved in Serious Human Rights 
Abuse or Corruption,” 82 Fed. Reg. 60,839 (December 20, 2017), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2017/12/26/2017-27925/blocking-the-property-of-persons-involved-in-serious-human-rights-
abuse-or-corruption .
149 As of March 27, 2022, based on author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Sanctions List Search, 
available at https://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/ . Figures include China, Hong Kong, and Macau-based 
actors, excluding duplicate entries associated with more than one of these jurisdictions. Rob Berschinski, 
“Trump Administration Notches a Serious Human Rights Win. No, really.” Just Security, January 10, 
2018, https://www.justsecurity.org/50846/trump-administration-notches-human-rights-win-no-really/ .
150 Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2020, Public Law No. 116-145, § 6, https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/PLAW-116publ145/pdf/PLAW-116publ145.pdf; and Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act of 
2021, Public Law No. 117-78, § 5, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-117publ78/pdf/PLAW-
117publ78.pdf.
151 As of March 27, 2022, based on author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Sanctions List Search, 
available at https://sanctionssearch.ofac.treas.gov/ . Executive Order 13936, “The President’s Executive 
Order on Hong Kong Normalization,” 85 Fed. Reg. 43,413 (July 14, 2020), https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2020/07/17/2020-15646/the-presidents-executive-order-on-hong-kong-normalization .
152 S.1260, “United States Innovation and Competition Act of 2021,” §§ 3211, 5202, https://www.congress.
gov/bill/117th-congress/senate-bill/1260/text .
153 S.1260, “United States Innovation and Competition Act of 2021,” §§ 5203-5204, https://www.congress.
gov/bill/117th-congress/senate-bill/1260/text .
154 H.R. 4521, The America COMPETES Act of 2022, https://rules.house.gov/sites/democrats.rules.house.
gov/files/BILLS-117HR4521RH-RCP117-31.pdf.
155 Executive Order 13942, “Addressing the Threat Posed by TikTok, and Taking Additional Steps to 
Address the National Emergency With Respect to the Information and Communications Technology

===== PDF_PAGE 147 =====
134 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
and Services Supply Chain,” 85 Fed. Reg. 48,637 (August 6, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/08/11/2020-17699/addressing-the-threat-posed-by-tiktok-and-taking-additional-
steps-to-address-the-national-emergency ; and Executive Order 13943, “Addressing the Threat Posed 
by WeChat, and Taking Additional Steps to Address the National Emergency With Respect to the 
Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain,” 85 Fed. Reg. 48,641 
(August 6, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/08/11/2020-17700/addressing-the-
threat-posed-by-wechat-and-taking-additional-steps-to-address-the-national-emergency .
156 Executive Order 13873, “Securing the Information and Communications Technology and 
Services Supply Chain,” 84 Fed. Reg. 22689 (May 15, 2019) https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2019/05/17/2019-10538/securing-the-information-and-communications-technology-and-
services-supply-chain .
157 “Identification of Prohibited Transactions to Implement Executive Order 13942 and Address the Threat 
Posed by TikTok and the National Emergency With Respect to the Information and Communications 
Technology and Services Supply Chain,” Commerce Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 60,061 (September 24, 
2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/09/24/2020-21193/identification-of-prohibited-
transactions-to-implement-executive-order-13942-and-address-the-threat .
158 Executive Order 13971, “Addressing the Threat Posed by Applications and Other Software Developed or 
Controlled by Chinese Companies,” 86 Fed. Reg. 1249 (January 5, 2021), https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2021/01/08/2021-00305/addressing-the-threat-posed-by-applications-and-other-
software-developed-or-controlled-by-chinese .
159 Robert Chesney, “TikTok, WeChat, and Biden’s New Executive Order: What You Need to Know,” 
Lawfare, June 9, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/tiktok-wechat-and-bidens-new-executive-order-
what-you-need-know.
160 Executive Order 13920, “Securing the United States Bulk-Power System,” 85 Fed. Reg. 26595 (May 1, 
2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/05/04/2020-09695/securing-the-united-states-
bulk-power-system.
161 Department of Energy, “Prohibition Order Securing Critical Defense Facilities,” 86 Fed. Reg. 533 
(January 6, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/01/06/2020-28773/prohibition-
order-securing-critical-defense-facilities .
162 “Notice of Request for Information (RFI) on Ensuring the Continued Security of the United States 
Critical Electric Infrastructure,” Department of Energy, 86 Fed. Reg. 21,309 (April 22, 2021), https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/04/22/2021-08482/notice-of-request-for-information-rfi-on-
ensuring-the-continued-security-of-the-united-states .
163 “Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain,” 
Commerce Department, 86 Fed. Reg. 4909 (January 19, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/01/19/2021-01234/securing-the-information-and-communications-technology-and-
services-supply-chain .
164 “Fact Sheet: Executive Order Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries,” 
press release, White House, June 9, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/06/09/fact-sheet-executive-order-protecting-americans-sensitive-data-from-
foreign-adversaries/ ; and Executive Order 14034, “Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data From 
Foreign Adversaries,” 86 Fed. Reg. 31,423 (June 9, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/06/11/2021-12506/protecting-americans-sensitive-data-from-foreign-adversaries .
165 “U.S. Secretary of Commerce Gina Raimondo Statement on Actions Taken Under ICTS Supply Chain 
Executive Order,” press release, Commerce Department, March 17, 2021, https://www.commerce.gov/
news/press-releases/2021/03/us-secretary-commerce-gina-raimondo-statement-actions-taken-under-icts ; 
Alexandra Alper, “Exclusive: U.S. Examining Alibaba’s Cloud Unit for National Security Risks – 
Sources,” Reuters, January 19, 2022, https://www.reuters.com/technology/exclusive-us-examining-
alibabas-cloud-unit-national-security-risks-sources-2022-01-18/ ; and Ben Brody, “A Secretive US Security 
Program Has Its Sights on DiDi,” Protocol, March 23, 2022, https://www.protocol.com/policy/didi-
commerce-icts.
166 Haye Kesteloo, “Department of Defense Bans the Purchase of Commercial-Over-the-Shelf UAS, 
Including DJI Drones Effective Immediately,” DroneDJ, June 7, 2018, https://dronedj.com/2018/06/07/
department-of-defense-bans-the-purchase-of-commercial-over-the-shelf-uas-including-dji-drones/ ; and

===== PDF_PAGE 148 =====
JON BATEMAN 135 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, Public Law No. 116-92, § 848, https://www.
govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-116publ92/pdf/PLAW-116publ92.pdf.
167 “Secretary Bernhardt Signs Order Grounding Interior’s Drone Fleet for Non-Emergency Operations,” 
press release, Department of Interior, January 29, 2020, https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/secretary-
bernhardt-signs-order-grounding-interiors-drone-fleet-non-emergency .
168 Executive Order 13981, “Protecting the United States From Certain Unmanned Aircraft Systems,” 86 
Fed. Reg. 6,821 (January 18, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/01/22/2021-01646/
protecting-the-united-states-from-certain-unmanned-aircraft-systems .
169 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, Public Law No. 115-232, § 
889(f)(3)(A-B).
170 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, Public Law No. 115-232, § 
889(f)(3)(D).
171 Angela B. Styles, Scott M. Heimberg, Robert K. Huffman, and Chris Chamberlain, “Section 889(a)(1)
(B): Five Things to Know About the Interim Rule and a Roadmap for Compliance,” Akin Gump, August 
5, 2020, https://www.akingump.com/en/news-insights/section-889a1b-five-things-to-know-about-the-
interim-rule-and-a-roadmap-for-compliance.html .
172 Author’s analysis of the Treasury Department’s Federal Contract Explorer spreadsheet, available at 
https://datalab.usaspending.gov/unstructured-data/contract-explorer/awards_contracts_FY18_v2.csv . 
This figure excludes all entries with exact duplicate names; however, they include entries for close 
variations of names, aliases, subsidiaries, and affiliates.
173 47 C.F.R. §§ 54.9–54.11; and “Protecting Against National Security Threats to the Communications 
Supply Chain Through FCC Programs,” FCC, 86 Fed. Reg. 46,995 (August 23, 2021), https://www.
federalregister.gov/documents/2021/08/23/2021-17279/protecting-against-national-security-threats-to-
the-communications-supply-chain-through-fcc-programs .
174 Matt Kapko, “Rural US Carriers Secure $1.9B to Rip Out Chinese Equipment,” SDxCentral, December 
23, 2020, https://www.sdxcentral.com/articles/news/rural-us-carriers-secure-1-9b-to-rip-out-chinese-
equipment/2020/12/; and Mike Dano, “Verizon, CenturyLink, Windstream Still Using Huawei, 
ZTE Equipment,” September 4, 2020, https://www.lightreading.com/security/verizon-centurylink-
windstream-still-using-huawei-zte-equipment/d/d-id/763705 .
175 As of December 1, 2021. Eileen Guo, Jess Aloe, and Karen Hao, “We Built a Database to Understand the 
China Initiative. Then the Government Changed Its Records.” MIT Technology Review, December 2, 
2021, https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/12/02/1039397/china-initiative-database-doj/ .
176 “Chinese Telecommunications Conglomerate Huawei and Subsidiaries Charged in Racketeering 
Conspiracy and Conspiracy to Steal Trade Secrets,” press release, Justice Department, February 13, 2020, 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/chinese-telecommunications-conglomerate-huawei-and-subsidiaries-
charged-racketeering .
177 “Information About the Department of Justice’s China Initiative and a Compilation of China-Related 
Prosecutions Since 2018,” Justice Department, November 19, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/nsd/
information-about-department-justice-s-china-initiative-and-compilation-china-related .
178 “Chinese Telecommunications Conglomerate Huawei and Subsidiaries Charged in Racketeering 
Conspiracy and Conspiracy to Steal Trade Secrets,” press release, Justice Department, February 13, 2020, 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/chinese-telecommunications-conglomerate-huawei-and-subsidiaries-
charged-racketeering .
179 As of September 15, 2021. Ellen Nakashima and David Nakamura, “China Initiative Aims to Stop 
Economic Espionage. Is Targeting Academics Over Grant Fraud ‘Overkill’?,” Washington Post, 
September 15, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/china-initiative-questions-
dismissals/2021/09/15/530ef936-f482-11eb-9738-8395ec2a44e7_story.html.
180 Ellen Nakashima and David Nakamura, “U.S. Drops Cases Against Five Researchers Accused of 
Hiding Ties to Chinese Military,” Washington Post, July 23, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.
com/national-security/us-drops-cases-against-five-researchers-accused-of-hiding-ties-to-chinese-
military/2021/07/23/54a8b268-ec04-11eb-8950-d73b3e93ff7f_story.html ; and Elizabeth Redden, “A 
Retreat From China Collaborations in the Face of U.S. Scrutiny,” Inside Higher Ed, October 29, 2021, 
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2021/10/29/survey-finds-chilling-effect-china-initiative .

===== PDF_PAGE 149 =====
136 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
181 George P. Varghese, Benjamin Conery, Hyun-Soo Lim, and Christina Luo, “DOJ’s ‘China Initiative’ 
Falters,” Wilmer Hale, August 5, 2021, https://www.wilmerhale.com/en/insights/client-alerts/20210805-
dojs-china-initiative-falters .
182 Ellen Nakashima and David Nakamura, “U.S. Drops Cases Against Five Researchers Accused of 
Hiding Ties to Chinese Military,” Washington Post, July 23, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.
com/national-security/us-drops-cases-against-five-researchers-accused-of-hiding-ties-to-chinese-
military/2021/07/23/54a8b268-ec04-11eb-8950-d73b3e93ff7f_story.html ; Associated Press, “Tennessee 
Professor With Ties to China Acquitted by District Judge,” Washington Post, September 10, 2021, 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/tennessee-professor-with-ties-to-china-acquitted-by-district-
judge/2021/09/10/30d32e74-0c64-11ec-aea1-42a8138f132a_story.html; and Ellen Barry and Katie 
Benner, “U.S. Drops Its Case Against M.I.T. Scientist Accused of Hiding China Links,” New York Times, 
January 20, 2022, https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/20/science/gang-chen-mit-china-initiative.html .
183 “Harvard University Professor Convicted of Making False Statements and Tax Offenses,” press release, 
Justice Department, December 21, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/usao-ma/pr/harvard-university-
professor-convicted-making-false-statements-and-tax-offenses .
184 Matthew Olsen, “Assistant Attorney General Matthew Olsen Delivers Remarks on Countering Nation-
State Threats,” Justice Department, February 23, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/assistant-
attorney-general-matthew-olsen-delivers-remarks-countering-nation-state-threats .
185 Matthew Olsen, “Assistant Attorney General Matthew Olsen Delivers Remarks on Countering Nation-
State Threats,” Justice Department, February 23, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/assistant-
attorney-general-matthew-olsen-delivers-remarks-countering-nation-state-threats .
186 The canvas is not entirely blank, as Congress has made it difficult for the executive branch to rescind 
certain China-tech restrictions. In this way, Congress is contributing to the risk (discussed later) of 
feedback loops that entrench and accelerate technological decoupling.

===== PDF_PAGE 150 =====
JON BATEMAN 137 
CHOOSING A STRATEGY 
187 Evan Burke, “Trump-Era Policies Toward Chinese STEM Talent: A Need for Better Balance,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, March 25, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/25/
trump-era-policies-toward-chinese-stem-talent-need-for-better-balance-pub-84137 .
188 For a more sophisticated taxonomy that is not tech-specific, see Ganesh Sitaraman, “Mapping the 
China Debate,” Lawfare, May 26, 2020, https://www.lawfareblog.com/mapping-china-debate . For a 
robust synthesis of decades of expert debates on geo-technological competition and controls, see Adam 
Kline and Tim Hwang, “From Cold War Sanctions to Weaponized Interdependence: An Annotated 
Bibliography on Competition and Control Over Emerging Technologies,” Center for Security and 
Emerging Technology, September 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/from-cold-war-
sanctions-to-weaponized-interdependence/ .
189 Matt Pottinger, “Beijing’s American Hustle,” Foreign Affairs , September/October 2021, https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/asia/2021-08-23/beijings-american-hustle ; Derek Scissors, “Partial Decoupling 
From China: A Brief Guide,” American Enterprise Institute, July 2020, https://www.aei.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/07/Partial-decoupling-from-China.pdf ; and Tom Cotton, “Beat China: Targeted 
Decoupling and the Economic Long War,” February 2021, https://www.cotton.senate.gov/imo/media/
doc/210216_1700_China%20Report_FINAL.pdf .
190 Farhad Manjoo, “Dealing With China Isn’t Worth the Moral Cost,” New York Times, October 9, 2019, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/09/opinion/china-houston-rockets.html ; and “A Human Rights 
Approach to US-China Policy,” Human Rights Watch, February 17, 2021, https://www.hrw.org/
news/2021/02/17/human-rights-approach-us-china-policy .
191 Ryan Browne, “Top US General Says Google ‘Is Indirectly Benefiting the Chinese Military,’” CNN, 
March 14, 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2019/03/14/politics/dunford-china-google/index.html .
192 A magisterial version of this argument can be found in Rush Doshi, The Long Game (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2021). That said, Doshi’s discussion of technology does not necessarily fit 
within restrictionist canon. He ultimately calls for a fairly targeted set of U.S. government tech controls 
combined with robust offensive investment and international coordination. Meanwhile, Hal Brands and 
Michael Beckley have provided a contrasting set of predictions, arguing that China is a “peaking power” 
whose growing boldness on the world stage stems from a sense of impending decline. Hal Brands and 
Michael Beckley, “China Is a Declining Power—and That’s the Problem,” Foreign Policy, September 24, 
2021, https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/09/24/china-great-power-united-states/.
193 Hal Brands, “Containment Can Work Against China, Too,” Wall Street Journal , December 3, 2021, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/containment-can-work-against-china-too-11638547169 . Elsewhere, Brands 
and Michael Beckley have argued that Washington should “check China’s technological expansion” 
by “restrict[ing] the export of technologies made in the United States and other democracies on which 
Chinese technology still depends” (including “semiconductors”), yet they cautioned against a “full 
technological embargo.” Michael Beckley and Hal Brands, “Competition With China Could Be 
Short and Sharp,” Foreign Affairs , December 17, 2020, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-
states/2020-12-17/competition-china-could-be-short-and-sharp .
194 Kiran Stacey and James Politi, “Google Warns of US National Security Risks From Huawei Ban,” 
Financial Times, June 6 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/3bbb6fec-88c5-11e9-a028-86cea8523dc2 ; 
and John Neuffer, “Report Shows Risks of Excessive Restrictions on Trade With China,” Semiconductor 
Industry Association, March 9, 2020, https://www.semiconductors.org/report-shows-risks-of-excessive-
restrictions-on-trade-with-china/ .
195 “Internet Society Statement on U.S. Clean Network Program,” press release, Internet Society, August 
7, 2020, https://www.internetsociety.org/news/statements/2020/internet-society-statement-on-u-s-
clean-network-program/ ; and “An Open, Interconnected and Interoperable Internet (Joint Letter),” 
World Wide Web Foundation, September 14, 2021, https://webfoundation.org/2021/09/an-open-
interconnected-and-interoperable-internet-joint-letter/.
196 Bernie Sanders, “Washington’s Dangerous New Consensus on China,” Foreign Affairs , June 17, 2021, 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2021-06-17/washingtons-dangerous-new-consensus-china .

===== PDF_PAGE 151 =====
138 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
197 Daniel Flatley, “Bernie Sanders Proposes Forcing Chipmakers to Give U.S. Equity for Aid,” Bloomberg, 
May 24, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-24/sanders-proposes-forcing-
chipmakers-to-give-u-s-equity-for-aid?sref=QmOxnLFz .
198 “CAPAC Members and Attorney General Garland Discuss China Initiative, COVID-19 Hate Crimes 
Act, and Language Access,” press release, Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus, October 29, 
2021, https://capac-chu.house.gov/press-release/capac-members-and-attorney-general-garland-discuss-
china-initiative-covid-19-hate .
199 “Cooperation, Not Cold War, to Confront the Climate Crisis,” open letter, Friends of the Earth, July 
7, 2021, http://foe.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Cooperation-Not-Cold-War-To-Confront-the-
Climate-Crisis-129.pdf.
200 “Turnaround: New Multilateral Trade Rules for People-Centered Shared Prosperity and Sustainable 
Development,” press release, Our World Is Not for Sale network, September 2021, https://
ourworldisnotforsale.net/2021_WTO-Turnaround ; and David Klion, “What Should the Left Do About 
China?,” The Nation, January 11, 2022, https://www.thenation.com/article/world/china-left-foreign-
policy/.
201 “Asymmetric Competition: A Strategy for China & Technology,” China Strategy Group, Fall 2020, 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/20463382-final-memo-china-strategy-group-axios-1 .
202 Stephanie Segal, “Degrees of Separation: A Targeted Approach to U.S.-China Decoupling – Final 
Report,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, October 2021, https://csis-website-prod.
s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/211021_Segal_DegreesSeparation_Final.pdf .
203 Richard Danzig and Lorand Laskai, “Symbiosis and Strive: Where Is the Sino-American Relationship 
Bound?,” Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU APL), 2020, https://www.jhuapl.
edu/assessing-us-china-technology-connections/dist/00f3f3c246ab508f9fe11452bb18200c.pdf .
204 Smart Competition: Adapting U.S. Strategy Toward China at 40 Years: A Hearing Before the House Foreign 
Affairs Committee , 116th Cong. (2019) (testimony of Samm Sacks, May 8, 2019), https://www.congress.
gov/116/meeting/house/109457/witnesses/HHRG-116-FA00-Wstate-SacksS-20190508.pdf.
205 Susan Shirk, “How to Shield Silicon Valley,” Bloomberg, July 3, 2018, https://www.bloomberg.com/
opinion/articles/2018-07-03/how-the-u-s-should-defend-its-high-tech-from-china?sref=QmOxnLFz .
206 Chris Coons, “Senator Coons Outlines Bipartisan Strategy for U.S.-China Relations at the Wilson 
Center,” press release, October 18, 2019, https://www.coons.senate.gov/news/press-releases/senator-
coons-outlines-bipartisan-strategy-for-us-china-relations-at-the-wilson-center .
207 Salman Ahmed et al., “Making U.S. Foreign Policy Work Better for the Middle Class,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, September, 23, 2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/files/USFP_
FinalReport_final1.pdf .
208 Dina Smeltz, Ivo Daalder, Karl Friedhoff, Craig Kafura, and Emily Sullivan, “A Foreign Policy for the 
Middle Class—What Americans Think,” Chicago Council on Global Affairs, October 2021, https://
www.thechicagocouncil.org/sites/default/files/2021-10/ccs2021_fpmc_0.pdf .
209 Andrew Imbrie, Ryan Fedasiuk, Catherine Aiken, Tarun Chhabra, and Husanjot Chahal, “Agile 
Alliances: How the United States and Its Allies Can Deliver a Democratic Way of AI,” Center for 
Security and Emerging Technology, February 2020, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/agile-
alliances/.
210 For more on the relationship between uncertainty and incrementalism, see Daniel W. Drezner, Ronald 
R. Krebs, and Randall Schweller, “The End of Grand Strategy,” Foreign Affairs , May/June 2020, https://
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/world/2020-04-13/end-grand-strategy . Drezner, Krebs, and Schweller 
advocate decentralized, bottom-up decisionmaking, whereas this report proposes top-down strategic 
guidance.
211 Dan Strumpf, “U.S. Set Out to Hobble China’s Huawei, and So It Has,” Wall Street Journal , October 7, 
2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-set-out-to-hobble-chinas-huawei-and-so-it-has-11633617478.
212 Huawei’s current placement on the Treasury Department’s Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial 
Complex Companies List is an outgrowth of its earlier (now-lapsed) designation as a “Communist 
Chinese Military Company” by DOD. Huawei still remains on another, similar DOD list—the so-called 
Section 1260H List—but this does not yet have any clear legal consequences. “Biden Administration 
Revises and Expands Restrictions on U.S. Person Investment in Chinese Companies and Releases New

===== PDF_PAGE 152 =====
JON BATEMAN 139 
List of ‘Chinese Military Companies’ Under 2021 NDAA Section 1260H,” Dorsey, June 10, 2021, 
https://www.dorsey.com/newsresources/publications/client-alerts/2021/06/new-list-of-chinese-military-
companies.
213 “The Backlash to Huawei’s Global 5G Expansion,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, July 
22, 2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/publications/interactive/huawei-timeline .
214 Stu Woo, “The U.S. Is Back in the 5G Game,” Wall Street Journal , May 26, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/
articles/us-5g-companies-11621870061.
215 Stu Woo and Drew Hinshaw, “U.S. Fight Against Chinese 5G Efforts Shifts From Threats to Incentives,” 
Wall Street Journal , June 14, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-fight-against-chinese-5g-efforts-
shifts-from-threats-to-incentives-11623663252 .
216 Ariel E. Levite and Lyu Jinghua, “Travails of an Interconnected World: From Pandemics to the Digital 
Economy,” Lawfare, April 30, 2020, https://www.lawfareblog.com/travails-interconnected-world-
pandemics-digital-economy .
217 “Court Imposes Maximum Fine on Sinovel Wind Group for Theft of Trade Secrets,” press release, Justice 
Department, July 6, 2018, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/court-imposes-maximum-fine-sinovel-wind-
group-theft-trade-secrets ; and Diane Cardwell, “Solar Company Seeks Stiff U.S. Tariffs to Deter Chinese 
Spying,” New York Times, September 1, 2014, https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/02/business/trade-
duties-urged-as-new-deterrent-against-cybertheft.html .
218 Jonathan Watts, “We Have 12 Years to Limit Climate Change Catastrophe, Warns UN,” Guardian, 
October 8, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/08/global-warming-must-not-
exceed-15c-warns-landmark-un-report .
219 Chris Buckley and Lisa Friedman, “Climate Change Is ‘Not a Geostrategic Weapon,’ Kerry Tells Chinese 
Leaders,” September 1, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/02/world/asia/climate-china-us-kerry.
html.
220 Jon Bateman, “National Security in an Age of Insurrection,” Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, January 14, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/01/14/national-security-in-age-of-
insurrection-pub-83635.
221 Ellen Nakashima, “More Than 1,000 Visiting Researchers Affiliated With the Chinese Military Fled the 
United States This Summer, Justice Department Says,” Washington Post, December 2, 2020, https://www.
washingtonpost.com/national-security/more-than-1000-visiting-researchers-affiliated-with-the-chinese-
military-fled-the-united-states-this-summer-justice-department-says/2020/12/02/9c564dee-34e1-11eb-
b59c-adb7153d10c2_story.html.
222 Ellen Nakashima and David Nakamura, “U.S. Drops Cases Against Five Researchers Accused of 
Hiding Ties to Chinese Military,” Washington Post, July 23, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.
com/national-security/us-drops-cases-against-five-researchers-accused-of-hiding-ties-to-chinese-
military/2021/07/23/54a8b268-ec04-11eb-8950-d73b3e93ff7f_story.html .
223 Remco Zwetsloot, Emily Weinstein, and Ryan Fedasiuk, “Assessing the Scope of U.S. Visa Restrictions 
on Chinese Students,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, February 2021, https://cset.
georgetown.edu/publication/assessing-the-scope-of-u-s-visa-restrictions-on-chinese-students/ .
224 Humeyra Pamuk, “U.S. Revokes More Than 1,000 Visas of Chinese Nationals, Citing Military Links,” 
Reuters, September 9, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-china-visas-students/u-s-revokes-
more-than-1000-visas-of-chinese-nationals-citing-military-links-idUSKBN26039D ; and Stuart 
Anderson, “Biden Keeps Costly Trump Visa Policy Denying Chinese Grad Students,” Forbes, August 10, 
2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/stuartanderson/2021/08/10/biden-keeps-costly-trump-visa-policy-
denying-chinese-grad-students/?sh=4f73456c3641 .
225 For a side-by-side comparison of U.S. and Chinese government actions, see Yan Luo, Samm Sacks, 
Naomi Wilson, and Abigail Coplin, “Mapping U.S.–China Technology Decoupling,” DigiChina, 
August 27, 2020, https://fsi-live.s3.us-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/digichina-mapping-decoupling-
final1.pdf.
226 B. Chen Zhu, Paul D. McKenzie, and Cheryl Zhu, “China’s ‘Unreliable Entity List’ Creates New 
Countervailing Risks for Companies Navigating U.S. Sanctions and Long-Arm Enforcement,” Morrison 
Foerster, October 7, 2020, https://www.mofo.com/resources/insights/201007-china-mofcom-unreliable-
entity-list.html .

===== PDF_PAGE 153 =====
140 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
227 Jane Li, “The Return of Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou Has Become a Nationalist Moment for China,” 
Quartz, September 27, 2021, https://qz.com/2065090/the-return-of-huawei-cfo-becomes-a-nationalist-
moment-for-china/.
228 “China Investigates Didi Over Cybersecurity Days After Its Huge IPO,” Reuters, July 2, 2021, https://
www.reuters.com/technology/china-cyberspace-administration-launches-security-investigation-into-
didi-2021-07-02/.
229 Senator John Kennedy, “Kennedy, Sullivan Call on SEC to Enforce Transparency Laws for Chinese 
Companies Following Didi IPO Debacle,” July 29, 2021, https://www.kennedy.senate.gov/
public/2021/7/kennedy-sullivan-call-on-sec-to-enforce-transparency-laws-for-chinese-companies-
following-didi-ipo-debacle .
230 “Trade War: How Reliant Are US Colleges on Chinese Students?,” BBC, June 12, 2019, https://www.
bbc.com/news/world-asia-48542913.
231 Mary Hui, “Japan’s Global Rare Earths Quest Holds Lessons for the US and Europe,” Quartz, December 
28, 2021, https://qz.com/1998773/japans-rare-earths-strategy-has-lessons-for-us-europe/ .
232 John D. McKinnon, “U.S. to Impose Sweeping Rule Aimed at China Technology Threats,” Wall Street 
Journal, February 26, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-to-impose-sweeping-rule-aimed-at-china-
technology-threats-11614362435.
233 Samantha Subin, “Palantir CEO Says Companies Working With U.S. Adversaries Should Justify Their 
Position,” CNBC, November 23 2021, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/11/23/palantir-ceo-companies-
working-with-us-adversaries-should-justify-their-position-.html .
TRANSLATING STRATEGY INTO POLICY AND PROCESS
234 Although the analysis and recommendations in this section are grounded in the centrist strategy outlined 
earlier, the analytical structure and methodology used can be readily adopted by restrictionists or 
cooperationists to frame their own arguments.

===== PDF_PAGE 154 =====
JON BATEMAN 141 
MAINTAINING A MILITARY EDGE OVER CHINA
235 “China Military Power: Modernizing a Force to Fight and Win,” Defense Intelligence Agency, 2019, 
https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/Images/News/Military_Powers_Publications/China_Military_Power_
FINAL_5MB_20190103.pdf .
236 Department of Defense Budget Posture: A Hearing Before the Senate Armed Services Committee , 115th Cong. 
(2017) (testimony of General Joseph F. Dunford, Jr., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, June 13, 
2017), https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Dunford_06-13-17.pdf .
237 Michael Dahm, “Chinese Debates on the Military Utility of Artificial Intelligence,” War on the Rocks, 
June 4, 2020, https://warontherocks.com/2020/06/chinese-debates-on-the-military-utility-of-artificial-
intelligence/.
238 Elsa B. Kania and Lorand Laskai, “Myths and Realities of China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,” 
Center for a New American Security, January 28, 2021, https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/
myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusion-strategy .
239 In a 2021 report to Congress, DOD stated, “The PRC Uses Imports, Foreign Investments, Commercial 
Joint Ventures, Mergers and Acquisitions, and Industrial and Technical Espionage to Help Achieve 
Its Military Modernization Goals.” “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s 
Republic of China: 2021,” Department of Defense, November 3, 2021, https://media.defense.gov/2021/
Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-FINAL.PDF.
240 Robert D. Blackwill and Philip Zelikow, “The United States, China, and Taiwan: A Strategy to Prevent 
War,” Council on Foreign Relations, Special report no. 90, February 2021, https://cdn.cfr.org/sites/
default/files/report_pdf/csr90_1.pdf ; Elbridge Colby and Walter Slocombe, “The State of (Deterrence 
by) Denial,” War on the Rocks, March 22, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2021/03/the-state-of-
deterrence-by-denial/ ; and Tanner Greer, “Why I Fear for Taiwan,” Scholar’s Stage, September 11, 2020, 
https://scholars-stage.org/why-i-fear-for-taiwan/ .
241 The research also found that “U.S. companies are inadvertently powering Chinese military advances in 
AI” due to “loopholes and shortfalls in the export control system.” However, this problem is challenging 
to address and not cost-free, as discussed elsewhere. Ryan Fedasiuk, “We Spent a Year Investigating What 
the Chinese Army Is Buying. Here’s What We Learned,” Politico, November 10, 2021, https://www.
politico.com/news/magazine/2021/11/10/chinese-army-ai-defense-contracts-520445 .
242 “Final Report,” National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, March 2021, https://www.
nscai.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-Digital-1.pdf .
243 “Military and Security Developments Involving the People’s Republic of China: 2021,” Department of 
Defense, November 3, 2021, https://media.defense.gov/2021/Nov/03/2002885874/-1/-1/0/2021-CMPR-
FINAL.PDF.
244 Alex Stone and Peter W. Singer, “How China Is Planning for a Tech Decoupling,” Defense One, October 
12, 2021, https://www.defenseone.com/ideas/2021/10/how-china-planning-tech-decoupling/186029/ .
245 Daniel H. Nexon, “Against Great Power Competition,” Foreign Affairs , February 15, 2021, https://
www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2021-02-15/against-great-power-competition ; and Cornell 
Overfield, “Biden’s ‘Strategic Competition’ Is a Step Back,” Foreign Policy, October 13, 2021, https://
foreignpolicy.com/2021/10/13/biden-strategic-competition-national-defense-strategy/ .
246 Gordon Long, “Fundamental Research Security,” JASON, December 6, 2019, https://www.nsf.gov/news/
special_reports/jasonsecurity/JSR-19-2IFundamentalResearchSecurity_12062019FINAL.pdf .
247 Ryan Browne, “Top US General Says Google ‘Is Indirectly Benefiting the Chinese Military,’” CNN, 
March 14, 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2019/03/14/politics/dunford-china-google/index.html ; and B. 
Chen Zhu, Brandon L. Van Grack, Timothy W. Blakely, and Charles L. Capito, “U.S. Court Blocks 
Trump-Era Designation of Xiaomi as a Chinese Military Company and Permits Continued Trading in 
Its Securities,” Morrison Foerster, March 19, 2021, https://www.mofo.com/resources/insights/210319-us-
court-blocks-trump-era-designation.html .

===== PDF_PAGE 155 =====
142 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
248 Fenella McGerty and Meia Nouwens, “China’s New Five-Year Plan and 2021 Budget: What Do They 
Mean For Defence?,” International Institute for Strategic Studies, March 8, 2021, https://www.iiss.org/
blogs/analysis/2021/03/chinas-new-five-year-plan-and-2021-budget ; and David Arthur and F. Matthew 
Woodward, “Long-Term Implications of the 2021 Future Years Defense Program,” Congressional Budget 
Office, September 2020, https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56554.
249 This particular study was published in 2015, but in the intervening years, the key factors undergirding 
its conclusion have not reversed. Eric Heginbotham et al., “The U.S.-China Military Scorecard: Forces, 
Geography, and the Evolving Balance of Power, 1996-2017,” RAND Corporation, 2015, https://www.
rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR392.html .
250 For example, the Lowy Institute’s most recent Asia Power Index found that China is investing and 
gaining more in its international economic ties than in its defense capabilities and relationships. Hervé 
Lemahieu and Alyssa Leng, “Asia Power Index: Key Findings 2021,” Lowy Institute, 2021, https://power.
lowyinstitute.org/downloads/lowy-institute-2021-asia-power-index-key-findings-report.pdf .
251 This example is hypothetical.
252 Christian Brose, “The New Revolution in Military Affairs: War’s Sci-Fi Future,” Foreign Affairs , May/
June 2019, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2019-04-16/new-revolution-military-affairs .
253 David Benowitz, “DJI Added to the US Entity List – What’s the Impact?,” DroneAnalyst, December 21, 
2020, https://droneanalyst.com/2020/12/21/dji-added-to-the-us-entity-list-whats-the-impact .
254 B. Chen Zhu, Brandon L. Van Grack, Timothy W. Blakely, and Charles L. Capito, “U.S. Court Blocks 
Trump-Era Designation of Xiaomi as a Chinese Military Company and Permits Continued Trading in 
Its Securities,” Morrison Foerster, March 19, 2021, https://www.mofo.com/resources/insights/210319-us-
court-blocks-trump-era-designation.html .
255 “President Biden Revamps Communist Chinese Military Companies (CCMC) Sanctions Program,” 
Paul, Weiss, June 7, 2021, https://www.paulweiss.com/practices/litigation/economic-sanctions-aml/
publications/president-biden-revamps-communist-chinese-military-companies-ccmc-sanctions-
program?id=40293.
256 “Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain,” 
Commerce Department, 86 Fed. Reg. 4909 (January 19, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/01/19/2021-01234/securing-the-information-and-communications-technology-and-
services-supply-chain .
257 Select Committee of the U.S. House of Representatives on U.S. National Security and Military/
Commercial Concerns with the People’s Republic of China, “U.S. Export Policy Toward the PRC, 
vol. III, ch. 9.” May 25, 1999, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GPO-CRPT-105hrpt851/
pdf/GPO-CRPT-105hrpt851-3-5.pdf; and Ellen Nakashima and Gerry Shih, “China Builds 
Advanced Weapons Systems Using American Chip Technology,” Washington Post, April 9, 
2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/china-hypersonic-missiles-american-
technology/2021/04/07/37a6b9be-96fd-11eb-b28d-bfa7bb5cb2a5_story.html.
258 “Supercomputer Export Controls Strengthened,” Arms Control Association, https://www.armscontrol.
org/node/3147.
259 Ellen Nakashima and Gerry Shih, “China Builds Advanced Weapons Systems Using American Chip 
Technology,” Washington Post, April 9, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/china-
hypersonic-missiles-american-technology/2021/04/07/37a6b9be-96fd-11eb-b28d-bfa7bb5cb2a5_story.
html.
260 “Addition of Certain Persons to the Entity List; and Removal of Person From the Entity List Based on 
a Removal Request,” Commerce Department, 80 Fed. Reg. 8,524 (February 18, 2015), https://www.
federalregister.gov/documents/2015/02/18/2015-03321/addition-of-certain-persons-to-the-entity-list-and-
removal-of-person-from-the-entity-list-based-on-a .
261 Ana Swanson, Paul Mozur, and Steve Lohr, “U.S. Blacklists More Chinese Tech Companies Over 
National Security Concerns,” New York Times, June 21, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/21/
us/politics/us-china-trade-blacklist.html ; and Kate O’Keeffe and Asa Fitch, “U.S. Targets China’s 
Supercomputing Push With New Export Restrictions,” Wall Street Journal , June 21, 2019, https://www.
wsj.com/articles/u-s-targets-chinas-supercomputing-push-with-new-export-restrictions-11561129547 .

===== PDF_PAGE 156 =====
JON BATEMAN 143 
262 “Commerce Adds Seven Chinese Supercomputing Entities to Entity List for Their Support to China’s 
Military Modernization, and Other Destabilizing Efforts,” press release, Commerce Department, 
April 8, 2021, https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/04/commerce-adds-seven-chinese-
supercomputing-entities-entity-list-their .
263 Jane Zhang and Che Pan, “China’s Blacklisted Supercomputer Organisations: Who Are They and 
What Do They Do?,” South China Morning Post , April 9, 2021 https://www.scmp.com/tech/tech-war/
article/3128963/chinas-blacklisted-supercomputer-organisations-who-are-they-and-what ; and Ana 
Swanson, Paul Mozur, and Steve Lohr, “U.S. Blacklists More Chinese Tech Companies Over National 
Security Concerns,” New York Times, June 21, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/21/us/politics/
us-china-trade-blacklist.html .
264 Jeff Gerth, “U.S. Raises Trade Issue With China,” New York Times, July 2, 1997, https://www.nytimes.
com/1997/07/02/world/us-raises-trade-issue-with-china.html ; and Tom Mullaney, “The Origins of 
Chinese Supercomputing,” Foreign Affairs , August 4, 2016, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
china/2016-08-04/origins-chinese-supercomputing .
265 Mark Cancian and Adam Saxton, “What’s in a Name? Billions in Cuts Depend on Defining ‘Legacy,’” 
Breaking Defense, March 10, 2021, https://breakingdefense.com/2021/03/whats-in-a-name-billions-in-
cuts-depend-on-defining-legacy/ ; Jack Detsch, “‘No Decisions, No Changes’: Pentagon Fails to Stick Asia 
Pivot,” Foreign Policy, November 29, 2021, https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/11/29/pentagon-china-biden-
asia-pivot/; and Joe Gould, “Tech Startups Still Face the Pentagon’s ‘Valley of Death,’” Defense News, 
January 30, 2020, https://www.defensenews.com/2020/01/30/tech-startups-still-face-the-pentagons-
valley-of-death/.
266 Daniel Gonzales et al., “Unclassified and Secure: A Defense Industrial Base Cyber Protection Program 
for Unclassified Defense Networks,” RAND Corporation, 2020, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_
reports/RR4227.html .

===== PDF_PAGE 157 =====
144 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
LIMITING CHINESE NATIONAL SECURITY ESPIONAGE
267 “The China Threat,” Federal Bureau of Investigation, https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/
counterintelligence/the-china-threat .
268 Christopher Wray, “The Threat Posed by the Chinese Government and the Chinese Communist Party to 
the Economic and National Security of the United States” (video lecture, Hudson Institute, Washington, 
DC, July 7, 2020), https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/the-threat-posed-by-the-chinese-government-and-
the-chinese-communist-party-to-the-economic-and-national-security-of-the-united-states .
269 “Chinese National Who Conspired to Hack Into U.S. Defense Contractors’ Systems Sentenced to 46 
Months in Federal Prison,” Justice Department, July 13, 2016, https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/chinese-
national-who-conspired-hack-us-defense-contractors-systems-sentenced-46-months .
270 “Russia, China and Iran Hackers Target Trump and Biden, Microsoft Says,” BBC, September 11, 2020, 
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-54110457.
271 Mark Mazzetti, Adam Goldman, Michael S. Schmidt and Matt Apuzzo, “Killing C.I.A. Informants, 
China Crippled U.S. Spying Operations,” New York Times, May 20, 2017, https://www.nytimes.
com/2017/05/20/world/asia/china-cia-spies-espionage.html .
272 Zach Dorfman, “China Used Stolen Data to Expose CIA Operatives in Africa and Europe,” Foreign 
Policy, December 21, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/12/21/china-stolen-us-data-exposed-cia-
operatives-spy-networks/.
273 “China’s Collection of Genomic and Other Healthcare Data From America: Risks to Privacy and U.S. 
Economic and National Security,” National Counterintelligence and Security Center, February 2020, 
https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/SafeguardingOurFuture/NCSC_China_Genomics_Fact_
Sheet_2021revision20210203.pdf.
274 Zach Dorfman, “Tech Giants Are Giving China a Vital Edge in Espionage,” Foreign Policy, December 
23, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/12/23/china-tech-giants-process-stolen-data-spy-agencies/ .
275 Bojan Pancevski, “U.S. Officials Say Huawei Can Covertly Access Telecom Networks,” Wall Street 
Journal, February 12, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-officials-say-huawei-can-covertly-
access-telecom-networks-11581452256; and Gordon Corera, “Eric Schmidt: Huawei Has Engaged in 
Unacceptable Practices,” BBC, June 18, 2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-53080113.
276 Christopher Wray, “The Threat Posed by the Chinese Government and the Chinese Communist Party to 
the Economic and National Security of the United States” (video lecture, Hudson Institute, Washington, 
DC, July 7, 2020), https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/the-threat-posed-by-the-chinese-government-and-
the-chinese-communist-party-to-the-economic-and-national-security-of-the-united-states .
277 Stuart A. Thompson and Charlie Warzel, “Twelve Million Phones, One Dataset, Zero Privacy,” New York 
Times, December 19, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/12/19/opinion/location-tracking-
cell-phone.html; and Molly Olmstead, “A Prominent Priest Was Outed for Using Grindr. Experts Say It’s 
a Warning Sign,” Slate, July 21, 2021, https://slate.com/technology/2021/07/catholic-priest-grindr-data-
privacy.html.
278 Joseph Cox, “How the U.S. Military Buys Location Data From Ordinary Apps,” Motherboard, November 
16, 2020, https://www.vice.com/en/article/jgqm5x/us-military-location-data-xmode-locate-x ; and Justin 
Sherman, “Data Brokers Are Advertising Data on U.S. Military Personnel,” Lawfare, August 23, 2021, 
https://www.lawfareblog.com/data-brokers-are-advertising-data-us-military-personnel .
279 Edward Wong, “How China Uses LinkedIn to Recruit Spies Abroad,” New York Times, October 14, 
2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/27/world/asia/china-linkedin-spies.html .
280 Karen Weise and Paul Mozur, “LinkedIn to Shut Down Service in China, Citing ‘Challenging’ 
Environment,” New York Times, October 14, 2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/14/technology/
linkedin-china-microsoft.html .
281 Ben Kesling and Georgia Wells, “U.S. Military Bans TikTok Over Ties to China,” January 3, 2020, Wall 
Street Journal , https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-military-bans-tiktok-over-ties-to-china-11578090613 .

===== PDF_PAGE 158 =====
JON BATEMAN 145 
282 Jenna McLaughlin and Zach Dorfman, “‘Shattered’: Inside the Secret Battle to Save America’s 
Undercover Spies in the Digital Age,” Yahoo News, December 30, 2019, https://www.yahoo.com/
entertainment/shattered-inside-the-secret-battle-to-save-americas-undercover-spies-in-the-digital-
age-100029026.html.
283 More appropriate protections would include national data security and privacy standards, plus 
regulations, trainings, and counterintelligence programs specifically focused on the online activities of 
U.S. military members.
284 Martin Egnash, “Defense Travel System Data Breach Leaves Thousands Open to Identity Theft,” Stars 
and Stripes, March 1, 2018, https://www.stripes.com/defense-travel-system-data-breach-leaves-thousands-
open-to-identity-theft-1.514499.
285 “Provisions Pertaining to Certain Investments in the United States by Foreign Persons,” 
Treasury Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 3,112 (January 17, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/01/17/2020-00188/provisions-pertaining-to-certain-investments-in-the-united-states-
by-foreign-persons.
286 David J. Lynch, “Biotechnology: The US-China Dispute Over Genetic Data,” Financial Times, July 31, 
2017, https://www.ft.com/content/245a7c60-6880-11e7-9a66-93fb352ba1fe.
287 CFIUS also seems to be scrutinizing transactions involving much smaller pools of genetic data than its 
regulations would suggest. In October 2020, it reportedly prevented a Chinese entity from buying a 
San Diego fertility clinic. Eamon Javers, “U.S. Blocked Chinese Purchase of San Diego Fertility Clinic 
Over Medical Data Security Concerns,” CNBC, October 16, 2020, https://www.cnbc.com/2020/10/16/
trump-administration-blocked-chinese-purchase-of-us-fertility-clinic.html .
288 Echo Wang, “China’s Kunlun Tech Agrees to U.S. Demand to Sell Grindr Gay Dating App,” Reuters, 
May 13, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-grindr-m-a-beijingkunlun/chinas-kunlun-tech-agrees-
to-u-s-demand-to-sell-grindr-gay-dating-app-idUSKCN1SJ28N .
289 Kamran Kara-Pabani and Justin Sherman, “How a Norwegian Government Report Shows the Limits 
of CFIUS Data Reviews,” Lawfare, May 3, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/how-norwegian-
government-report-shows-limits-cfius-data-reviews .
290 “President Trump Orders Divestiture of StayNTouch, Inc. by Shiji Group of China,” Covington, 
March 9, 2020, https://www.cov.com/en/news-and-insights/insights/2020/03/president-trump-orders-
divestiture-of-stayntouch-inc-by-shiji-group-of-china .
291 Jena Tesse Fox, “Hotel Owner-Operator to Acquire PMS Company StayNTouch,” Hotel Management, 
August 31, 2020, https://www.hotelmanagement.net/tech/mcr-to-acquire-pms-software-company-
stayntouch.
292 Marriott International, Inc., “Form 10-K for the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020,” Securities and 
Exchange Commission, https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/0001048286/0001628280210
02433/mar-20201231.htm.
293 “Marriott Announces Starwood Guest Reservation Database Security Incident,” press release, Marriott, 
November 20, 2018, https://marriott.gcs-web.com/news-releases/news-release-details/marriott-
announces-starwood-guest-reservation-database-security .
294 Emphasis added. “Secretary Michael R. Pompeo at a Press Availability,” State Department, July 8, 2020, 
https://2017-2021-translations.state.gov/2020/07/08/secretary-michael-r-pompeo-at-a-press-availability-8/
index.html.
295 Executive Order 13971, “Addressing the Threat Posed by Applications and Other Software Developed or 
Controlled by Chinese Companies,” 86 Fed. Reg. 1249 (January 5, 2021), https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2021/01/08/2021-00305/addressing-the-threat-posed-by-applications-and-other-
software-developed-or-controlled-by-chinese ; Maria Abi-Habib, “India Bans Nearly 60 Chinese 
Apps, Including TikTok and WeChat,” New York Times, June 30, 2020, https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/06/29/world/asia/tik-tok-banned-india-china.html ; and Sameer Yasir and Hari Kumar, “India 
Bans 118 Chinese Apps as Indian Soldier Is Killed on Disputed Border,” New York Times, September 2, 
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/02/world/asia/india-bans-china-apps.html .

===== PDF_PAGE 159 =====
146 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
296 Emphasis added. Beijing’s Long Arm: Threats to U.S. National Security: A Hearing Before the Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence , 117th Cong. (2021) (testimony of William R. Evanina, August 4, 2021), 
https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/documents/os-bevanina-080421.pdf ; and Dina 
Temple-Raston, “China’s Microsoft Hack May Have Had a Bigger Purpose Than Just Spying,” NPR, 
August 26, 2021, https://www.npr.org/2021/08/26/1013501080/chinas-microsoft-hack-may-have-had-a-
bigger-purpose-than-just-spying .
297 Greg Roumeliotis and Echo Wang, “Exclusive China’s Tencent in Talks With U.S. to Keep Gaming 
Investments -Sources,” Reuters, May 5, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/technology/exclusive-chinas-
tencent-talks-with-us-keep-gaming-investments-sources-2021-05-05/ .
298 Jenny Leonard, Saleha Mohsin, and David McLaughlin, “Tencent’s Gaming Stakes Draw U.S. 
National Security Scrutiny,” Bloomberg, September 17, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2020-09-17/tencent-s-game-investments-draw-u-s-national-security-scrutiny .
299 Executive Order 14034, “Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries,” 86 Fed. Reg. 
31,423 (June 9, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/06/11/2021-12506/protecting-
americans-sensitive-data-from-foreign-adversaries .
300 Joseph Marks, “The Cybersecurity 202: Our Expert Network Says It’s Time for More Cybersecurity 
Regulations,” Washington Post, June 11, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2021/06/11/
cybersecurity-202-our-expert-network-says-it-time-more-cybersecurity-regulations/ ; and Robert D. 
Williams, “To Enhance Data Security, Federal Privacy Legislation Is Just a Start,” Brookings Institution, 
December 1, 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/techstream/to-enhance-data-security-federal-privacy-
legislation-is-just-a-start/ .

===== PDF_PAGE 160 =====
JON BATEMAN 147 
PREVENTING CHINESE SABOTAGE IN A CRISIS
301 “Notice of Request for Information (RFI) on Ensuring the Continued Security of the United States 
Critical Electric Infrastructure,” Department of Energy, 86 Fed. Reg. 21,309 (April 22, 2021), https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/04/22/2021-08482/notice-of-request-for-information-rfi-on-
ensuring-the-continued-security-of-the-united-states ; and “Prohibition Order Securing Critical Defense 
Facilities,” Department of Energy, 86 Fed. Reg. 533 (January 6, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/01/06/2020-28773/prohibition-order-securing-critical-defense-facilities .
302 Emily O. Goldman and Michael Warner, “Why a Digital Pearl Harbor Makes Sense . . . and Is 
Possible,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, October 16, 2017, https://carnegieendowment.
org/2017/10/16/why-digital-pearl-harbor-makes-sense-.-.-.-and-is-possible-pub-73405.
303 Britain quickly abandoned this strategy due to its large costs. But that does not mean that China 
would never consider its own similar strategy in a future Sino-U.S. crisis. If Beijing implemented such 
a strategy, it might once again turn out to be a mistake. But an initial blow against the United States 
could nevertheless be powerful, justifying U.S. efforts to prevent and mitigate such a scenario. Nicholas 
Lambert, “Brits-Krieg: The Strategy of Economic Warfare,” Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, October 16, 2017, https://carnegieendowment.org/2017/10/16/brits-krieg-strategy-of-economic-
warfare-pub-73403 .
304 “Annual Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community,” Director of National Intelligence, April 
9, 2021, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2021-Unclassified-Report.pdf .
305 Peter Harrell, Elizabeth Rosenberg, and Edoardo Saravalle, “China’s Use of Coercive Economic 
Measures,” Center for a New American Security, June 2018, https://s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/files.
cnas.org/documents/China_Use_FINAL-1.pdf ; and Evan A. Feigenbaum, “Is Coercion the New Normal 
in China’s Economic Statecraft?,” Macro Polo, July 25, 2017, https://carnegieendowment.org/2017/07/25/
is-coercion-new-normal-in-china-s-economic-statecraft-pub-72632 .
306 For example, the Lowy Institute’s most recent Asia Power Index identified “a short-term reprieve from an 
established pattern of relative US decline” compared to China. Hervé Lemahieu and Alyssa Leng, “Asia 
Power Index: Key Findings 2021,” Lowy Institute, 2021, https://power.lowyinstitute.org/downloads/
lowy-institute-2021-asia-power-index-key-findings-report.pdf . See also James Dobbins, Gabrielle Tarini, 
and Ali Wyne, “The Lost Generation in American Foreign Policy,” RAND Corporation, 2020, https://
www.rand.org/pubs/perspectives/PEA232-1.html .
307 The Biden administration’s 100-day review of the U.S. supply chain makes this point elegantly. Though 
not focused on critical infrastructure per se, it outlines a range of domestic and international risks to U.S. 
resilience in key sectors, and wisely treats hostile subversion from China as just one of many challenges. 
“Building Resilient Supply Chains, Revitalizing American Manufacturing, and Fostering Broad-Based 
Growth,” White House, June 2020, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/100-day-
supply-chain-review-report.pdf .
308 Ken Dilanian and Kelly O’Donnell, “Russian Criminal Group Suspected in Colonial Pipeline 
Ransomware Attack,” NBC News, May 10, 2021, https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/national-security/
russian-criminal-group-may-be-responsible-colonial-pipeline-ransomware-attack-n1266793 .
309 Adi Robertson, “AT&T Recovers From Multi-state Outage After Nashville Bombing,” The Verge, 
December 28, 2020, https://www.theverge.com/2020/12/28/22202822/att-outage-nashville-christmas-
bombing.
310 “Hack Attack Causes ‘Massive Damage’ at Steel Works,” BBC, December 22, 2014, https://www.bbc.
com/news/technology-30575104.
311 Nick Thieme, “After Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico’s Internet Problems Go From Bad to Worse,” PBS, 
October 23, 2018, https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/article/puerto-rico-hurricane-maria-internet/ .
312 William Yuen Ye, “With U.S. Restrictions on Huawei and ZTE, Where Will Rural America Turn?,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, December 10, 2020, https://www.csis.org/blogs/new-
perspectives-asia/us-restrictions-huawei-and-zte-where-will-rural-america-turn .
313 Matt Kapko, “Rural US Carriers Secure $1.9B to Rip Out Chinese Equipment,” SDxCentral, December 
23, 2020, https://www.sdxcentral.com/articles/news/rural-us-carriers-secure-1-9b-to-rip-out-chinese-
equipment/2020/12/.

===== PDF_PAGE 161 =====
148 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
314 William Yuen Ye, “With U.S. Restrictions on Huawei and ZTE, Where Will Rural America Turn?,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies, December 10, 2020, https://www.csis.org/blogs/new-
perspectives-asia/us-restrictions-huawei-and-zte-where-will-rural-america-turn .
315 Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Joint Publication 5-0: Joint Planning,” December 1, 2020, https://www.jcs.mil/
Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp5_0.pdf .
316 “National Critical Functions Set,” Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), April 2019, 
https://www.cisa.gov/national-critical-functions-set .
317 “Systemic Cyber Risk Reduction Venture,” CISA, https://www.cisa.gov/systemic-cyber-risk-reduction .
318 “2019 National Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA): Overview and 
Methodology,” Federal Emergency Management Agency, July 25, 2019, https://www.fema.gov/sites/
default/files/2020-06/fema_national-thira-overview-methodology_2019_0.pdf ; and “Homeland Security 
Planning Scenarios and Summary Descriptions,” Brookings Institution, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/20051026_3-1.pdf.
319 Executive Order 13920, “Securing the United States Bulk-Power System,” 85 Fed. Reg. 26595 (May 1, 
2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/05/04/2020-09695/securing-the-united-states-
bulk-power-system.
320 “Large Power Transformers and the U.S. Electric Grid,” Department of Energy, June 2021, https://www.
energy.gov/sites/prod/files/Large%20Power%20Transformer%20Study%20-%20June%202012_0.pdf .
321 Black Sobczak and Peter Behr, “Security – China and America’s 400-Ton Electric Albatross,” E&E 
News, April 25, 2019, https://www.eenews.net/stories/1060216451/.
322 “Prohibition Order Securing Critical Defense Facilities,” Department of Energy, 86 Fed. Reg. 533 
(January 6, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/01/06/2020-28773/prohibition-
order-securing-critical-defense-facilities .
323 “Notice of Request for Information (RFI) on Ensuring the Continued Security of the United States 
Critical Electric Infrastructure,” Department of Energy, 86 Fed. Reg. 21,309 (April 22, 2021), https://
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/04/22/2021-08482/notice-of-request-for-information-rfi-on-
ensuring-the-continued-security-of-the-united-states .
324 “Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain,” 
Commerce Department, 86 Fed. Reg. 4909 (January 19, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/01/19/2021-01234/securing-the-information-and-communications-technology-and-
services-supply-chain .
325 “Securing the Information and Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain,” 
Commerce Department, 86 Fed. Reg. 4909 (January 19, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/01/19/2021-01234/securing-the-information-and-communications-technology-and-
services-supply-chain .
326 Brandon L. Van Grack, Charles L. Capito, and Joseph A. Benkert, “Biden Administration Carries 
Forward Trump Era Executive Order Scrutinizing Imports and Sales of Certain Communications 
Technology and Services,” Morrison Foerster, April 1, 2021, https://www.mofo.com/resources/
insights/210401-trump-executive-order.html .
327 As discussed earlier, Biden issued an executive order outlining “a criteria-based decision framework and 
rigorous, evidence-based analysis” to help guide the rule’s application to internet-connected software. 
The Commerce Department subsequently proposed to incorporate this guidance into the ICTS rule, and 
invited comment on whether Biden’s criteria should also govern reviews of other kinds of software and 
hardware. Executive Order 14034, “Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries,” 86 
Fed. Reg. 31,423 (June 9, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/06/11/2021-12506/
protecting-americans-sensitive-data-from-foreign-adversaries ; and “Securing the Information and 
Communications Technology and Services Supply Chain; Connected Software Applications,” 
Commerce Department, 86 Fed. Reg. 67,379 (November 26, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/11/26/2021-25329/securing-the-information-and-communications-technology-and-
services-supply-chain-connected-software .

===== PDF_PAGE 162 =====
JON BATEMAN 149 
328 Francesca M.S. Guerrero and Jennifer L. Parry, “Veritas, a U.S. Genetic Sequencing Company, Suspends 
U.S. Operations Due to Decreased Funding; CFIUS Thought to Be Leading Cause,” Winston & Strawn, 
December 23, 2019, https://www.winston.com/en/global-trade-and-foreign-policy-insights/veritas-a-us-
genetic-sequencing-company-suspends-us-operations-due-to-decreased-funding-cfius-thought-to-be-
leading-cause.html .
329 Bill Gertz, “Lexmark, Lenovo Tech Funnels Data to China Intelligence Services,” Washington Times, 
February 24, 2020, https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2020/feb/24/lexmark-lenovo-tech-
funnels-data-china-intelligenc/ ; Roslyn Layton, “Why Is U.S. Policy Tough on Huawei and TikTok 
but Not Lenovo?,” Forbes, June 26, 2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/roslynlayton/2020/06/26/
why-is-us-policy-tough-on-huawei-and-tiktok-but-not-lenovo/?sh=3cdcb5cc7b6e ; James Marks, “The 
Chinese Threat That’s Hiding in Plain Sight,” The Bulwark, September 12, 2019, https://thebulwark.
com/the-chinese-threat-thats-hiding-in-plain-sight/ ; Roslyn Layton, “Stealing From the States: 
China’s Power Play in IT Contracts,” China Tech Threat, March 2020, https://chinatechthreat.com/
wp-content/uploads/2020/02/CTT-Report-Stealing-From-States-Chinas-Power-Play-in-IT-Contracts.
pdf; Ryan McMorrow and Kathrin Hille, “Lenovo’s Sales Strong Despite Growing Threat of US 
Sanctions,” Financial Times, August 13, 2020, https://www.ft.com/content/a5f5f290-04c9-4776-ae8d-
ee881b13bb3a.
330 Robert K. Knake, “A Cyberattack on the U.S. Power Grid,” Council on Foreign Relations, April 3, 2017, 
https://www.cfr.org/report/cyberattack-us-power-grid .
331 “Strategic Transformer Reserve,” Department of Energy, March 2017, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/
files/2017/04/f34/Strategic%20Transformer%20Reserve%20Report%20-%20FINAL.pdf .
332 Robert K. Knake, “A Cyberattack on the U.S. Power Grid,” Council on Foreign Relations, April 3, 
2017, https://www.cfr.org/report/cyberattack-us-power-grid ; and “Strategic Transformer Reserve,” 
Department of Energy, March 2017, https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/04/f34/Strategic%20
Transformer%20Reserve%20Report%20-%20FINAL.pdf .

===== PDF_PAGE 163 =====
150 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
LIMITING CHINESE INFLUENCE OPERATIONS
333 Christopher Wray, “The Threat Posed by the Chinese Government and the Chinese Communist Party to 
the Economic and National Security of the United States” (video lecture, Hudson Institute, Washington, 
DC, July 7, 2020), https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/the-threat-posed-by-the-chinese-government-and-
the-chinese-communist-party-to-the-economic-and-national-security-of-the-united-states .
334 Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian and Zach Dorfman, “Suspected Chinese Spy Targeted California 
Politicians,” Axios, December 8, 2020, https://www.axios.com/china-spy-california-politicians-
9d2dfb99-f839-4e00-8bd8-59dec0daf589.html ; Bethany Allen-Ebrahimian and Zach Dorfman, 
“Republican Donor Cindy Yang Linked to Chinese Influence Machine,” Foreign Policy, March 12, 2019, 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/03/12/962067-china-unitedfront-corruption-scandal/ ; and Bethany 
Allen-Ebrahimian, “China Built an Army of Influence Agents in the U.S.,” Daily Beast, July 18, 2018, 
https://www.thedailybeast.com/how-china-built-an-army-of-influence-agents-in-the-us .
335 Joshua Kurlantzick, “How China Is Interfering in Taiwan’s Election,” Council on Foreign Relations, 
November 7, 2019, https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/how-china-interfering-taiwans-election ; Amy 
Searight, “Countering China’s Influence Operations: Lessons From Australia,” Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, May 8, 2020, https://www.csis.org/analysis/countering-chinas-influence-
operations-lessons-australia ; and Alex Joske, Lin Li, Alexandra Pascoem and Nathan Attrill, “The 
Influence Environment: A Survey of Chinese-Language Media in Australia,” Australian Strategic 
Policy Institute, December 2020, https://s3-ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/ad-aspi/2020-12/The%20
influence%20environment.pdf?Mjytg1N_V2azySJlJoahgWzMOqxEpMYk .
336 “Annual Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community,” Director of National Intelligence, April 
9, 2021, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-2021-Unclassified-Report.pdf .
337 “Intelligence Community Assessment: Foreign Threats to the 2020 US Federal Elections,” National 
Intelligence Council, March 10, 2021, https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ICA-
declass-16MAR21.pdf .
338 Alex Joske, Lin Li, Alexandra Pascoem, and Nathan Attrill, “The Influence Environment: A Survey of 
Chinese-Language Media in Australia,” Australian Strategic Policy Institute, December 2020, https://
s3-ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/ad-aspi/2020-12/The%20influence%20environment.pdf?Mjytg1N_
V2azySJlJoahgWzMOqxEpMYk .
339 Alex Hern, “Revealed: How TikTok Censors Videos That Do Not Please Beijing,” Guardian, September 
25, 2019, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/sep/25/revealed-how-tiktok-censors-videos-
that-do-not-please-beijing ; Isobel Asher Hamilton, “A Senior TikTok Executive Admitted the Company 
Used to Censor Content Critical of China, ‘Specifically With Regard to the Uighur Situation,’” Business 
Insider, November 5, 2020, https://www.businessinsider.com/tiktok-censor-china-critical-content-
uighur-uighurs-2020-11.
340 Jon Bateman, Elonnai Hickock, Laura Courchesne, Isra Thange, and Jacob N. Shapiro, “Measuring 
the Effects of Influence Operations: Key Findings and Gaps From Empirical Research,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, June 28, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/06/28/
measuring-effects-of-influence-operations-key-findings-and-gaps-from-empirical-research-pub-84824 .
341 Major platform efforts include revisions to community standards, enforcement actions taken against 
proscribed activity, and adjustments to the functionality of platform products. For overviews of 
each of these three areas, see Jon Bateman, Natalie Thompson, and Victoria Smith, “How Social 
Media Platforms’ Community Standards Address Influence Operations,” Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, April 1, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/04/01/how-social-media-
platforms-community-standards-address-influence-operations-pub-84201 ; “Disinfodex,” Berkman 
Klein Center at Harvard University and the Ethics and Governance of Artificial Intelligence Fund at 
The Miami Foundation, 2020, https://disinfodex.org/; and Kamya Yadav, “Platform Interventions: How 
Social Media Counters Influence Operations,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, January 25, 
2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/01/25/platform-interventions-how-social-media-counters-
influence-operations-pub-83698 .

===== PDF_PAGE 164 =====
JON BATEMAN 151 
342 “One Year After Stop Hate for Profit: Platforms’ Progress,” Stop Hate for Profit, June 16, 2021, https://
www.stophateforprofit.org/platforms-progress-year-later ; and Jessica Guynn, “Facebook Winning War on 
COVID-19 Vaccine Lies, Hoaxes and Conspiracies. Twitter and TikTok? Not So Much, Report Says,” 
USA Today, May 7, 2021, https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/2021/05/07/facebook-twitter-tiktok-
covid-vaccine-conspiracy-theories-lies-hoaxes/4994731001/ .
343 Olivia Solon and Ken Dilanian, “China’s Influence Operations Offer a Glimpse Into the Future of 
Information Warfare,” NBC News, October 21, 2020, https://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-
news/china-s-influence-operations-offer-glimpse-future-information-warfare-n1244065 .
344 Betsy Woodruff Swan, “DHS Stands Up Domestic Terror Intelligence Team,” Politico, May 11, 2021, 
https://www.politico.com/news/2021/05/11/dhs-domestic-terror-intelligence-487145.
345 Executive Order 13942, “Addressing the Threat Posed by TikTok, and Taking Additional Steps to 
Address the National Emergency With Respect to the Information and Communications Technology 
and Services Supply Chain,” 85 Fed. Reg. 48,637 (August 6, 2020), https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2020/08/11/2020-17699/addressing-the-threat-posed-by-tiktok-and-taking-additional-steps-
to-address-the-national-emergency .
346 “Fact Sheet: Executive Order Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries,” White 
House, June 9, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/09/fact-
sheet-executive-order-protecting-americans-sensitive-data-from-foreign-adversaries/ ; and Executive Order 
14034, “Protecting Americans’ Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries,” 86 Fed. Reg. 31,423 (June 
9, 2021), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/06/11/2021-12506/protecting-americans-
sensitive-data-from-foreign-adversaries .
347 Marco Rubio, “Rubio Requests Biden Administration’s Plan for TikTok, Protecting Americans’ Data,” 
press release, October 12, 2021, https://www.rubio.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/2021/10/rubio-requests-
biden-administration-s-plan-for-tiktok-protecting-americans-data .
348 Greg Roumeliotis and Echo Wang, “China’s Tencent in Talks With U.S. to Keep Gaming Investments 
-Sources,” Reuters, May 5, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/technology/exclusive-chinas-tencent-talks-
with-us-keep-gaming-investments-sources-2021-05-05/ .
349 Vishnu Kannan, forthcoming paper, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace; and Kamya Yadav, 
“Countering Influence Operations: A Review of Policy Proposals Since 2016,” Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, November 30, 2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/11/30/countering-
influence-operations-review-of-policy-proposals-since-2016-pub-83333 .
350 Jon Bateman, Elonnai Hickock, Laura Courchesne, Isra Thange, and Jacob N. Shapiro, “Measuring 
the Effects of Influence Operations: Key Findings and Gaps From Empirical Research,” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, June 28, 2021, https://carnegieendowment.org/2021/06/28/
measuring-effects-of-influence-operations-key-findings-and-gaps-from-empirical-research-pub-84824 ; 
and Jon Bateman, Elonnai Hickock, Jacob N. Shapiro, Laura Courchesne, and Julia Ilhardt, 
“Measuring the Efficacy of Influence Operations Countermeasures: Key Findings and Gaps From 
Empirical Research,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, September 21, 2021, https://
carnegieendowment.org/2021/09/21/measuring-efficacy-of-influence-operations-countermeasures-key-
findings-and-gaps-from-empirical-research-pub-85389 .

===== PDF_PAGE 165 =====
152 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
DENYING SUPPORT FOR CHINESE AND CHINA-ENABLED 
AUTHORITARIANISM AND REPRESSION
351 “Freedom on the Net 2021: China,” Freedom House, 2021, https://freedomhouse.org/country/china/
freedom-net/2021.
352 John Hudson, “As Tensions With China Grow, Biden Administration Formalizes Genocide Declaration 
Against Beijing,” Washington Post, March 30, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/
china-genocide-human-rights-report/2021/03/30/b2fa8312-9193-11eb-9af7-fd0822ae4398_story.html .
353 Alina Polyakova and Chris Meserole, “Exporting Digital Authoritarianism,” Brookings Institution, 
August 2019, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/FP_20190826_digital_
authoritarianism_polyakova_meserole.pdf .
354 “Treasury Sanctions CEIEC for Supporting the Illegitimate Maduro Regime’s Efforts to Undermine 
Venezuelan Democracy,” Treasury Department, November 30, 2020, https://home.treasury.gov/news/
press-releases/sm1194.
355 “Interim National Security Strategic Guidance,” White House, March 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NSC-1v2.pdf.
356 Matthew S. Erie and Thomas Streinz, “The Beijing Effect: China’s ‘Digital Silk Road’ as Transnational 
Data Governance,” New York University Journal of International Law and Politics , April 1, 2021, https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3810256 .
357 Matthew S. Erie and Thomas Streinz, “The Beijing Effect: China’s ‘Digital Silk Road’ as Transnational 
Data Governance,” New York University Journal of International Law and Politics , April 1, 2021, https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3810256 .
358 Steven Feldstein, “When It Comes to Digital Authoritarianism, China Is a Challenge—But Not the 
Only Challenge,” War on the Rocks, February 12, 2021, https://warontherocks.com/2020/02/when-it-
comes-to-digital-authoritarianism-china-is-a-challenge-but-not-the-only-challenge/ .
359 “Three Former U.S. Intelligence Community and Military Personnel Agree to Pay More Than $1.68 
Million to Resolve Criminal Charges Arising From Their Provision of Hacking-Related Services to a 
Foreign Government,” press release, Justice Department, September 14, 2021, https://www.justice.gov/
opa/pr/three-former-us-intelligence-community-and-military-personnel-agree-pay-more-168-million ; 
Associated Press, “Germany Searches Premises of Spyware Maker FinFisher,” October 14, 2020, 
https://apnews.com/article/germany-munich-spyware-software-7dd9b8d8cdd8021334b709165db94
9b6; “Commerce Adds NSO Group and Other Foreign Companies to Entity List for Malicious Cyber 
Activities,” press release, Commerce Department, November 3, 2021, https://www.commerce.gov/
news/press-releases/2021/11/commerce-adds-nso-group-and-other-foreign-companies-entity-list ; Yonah 
Jeremy Bob, “Defense Min. Limits Countries Israeli Cyber Companies Can Sell to Post-NSO – report,” 
Jerusalem Post , November 25, 2021, https://www.jpost.com/israel-news/defense-min-limits-countries-
israeli-cyber-companies-can-sell-to-post-nso-report-687004 ; and Yonah Jeremy Bob, “Israeli Defense 
Ministry Tightens Cyber Exports Post-NSO Scandal,” Jerusalem Post , December 6, 2021, https://www.
jpost.com/breaking-news/defense-ministry-to-tighten-regulation-on-cyber-exports-687998 .
360 Thomas Lum and Michael A. Weber, “Human Rights in China and U.S. Policy: Issues for the 117th 
Congress,” Congressional Research Service, March 31, 2020, https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/
pdf/R/R46750.
361 Amy K. Lehr, “The United States Blacklisted 28 Chinese Entities Over Repression of Muslim Minorities 
in Xinjiang. What Does This Mean for Human Rights?,” Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
October 11, 2019, https://www.csis.org/analysis/united-states-blacklisted-28-chinese-entities-over-
repression-muslim-minorities-xinjiang .
362 “Xinjiang Supply Chain Business Advisory,” U.S. Government, July 13, 2021, https://www.state.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/07/Xinjiang-Business-Advisory-13July2021-1.pdf.
363 Lily Kuo and Jeanne Whalen, “Biden Administration Bars Imports of Solar Panels Linked to Forced 
Labor in China’s Xinjiang Region,” Washington Post, June 24, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
technology/2021/06/24/china-solar-forced-labor-imports-custom/ ; and Phred Dvorak and Matthew

===== PDF_PAGE 166 =====
JON BATEMAN 153 
Dalton, “Solar-Energy Supply Chain Depends on Region Where China Is Accused of Genocide,” Wall 
Street Journal , April 11, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/solar-energy-supply-chain-depends-on-
region-where-china-is-accused-of-genocide-11618147228.
364 “Treasury Sanctions CEIEC for Supporting the Illegitimate Maduro Regime’s Efforts to Undermine 
Venezuelan Democracy,” press release, Treasury Department, November 30, 2020, https://home.
treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm1194; and “U.S. Imposes Visa Restrictions on Certain Employees 
of Chinese Technology Companies That Abuse Human Rights,” State Department, July 15, 2020, 
https://2017-2021.state.gov/u-s-imposes-visa-restrictions-on-certain-employees-of-chinese-technology-
companies-that-abuse-human-rights/index.html .
365 Will Knight, “MIT Cuts Ties With a Chinese AI Firm Amid Human Rights Concerns,” Wired, April 21, 
2020, https://www.wired.com/story/mit-cuts-ties-chinese-ai-firm-human-rights/ .
366 Biden’s new Indo-Pacific Strategy states that “our objective is not to change the PRC but to shape the 
strategic environment in which it operates.” Trump’s own China Strategy likewise stated that “United 
States policies are not premised on an attempt to change the PRC’s domestic governance model.” “Indo-
Pacific Strategy of the United States,” White House, February 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2022/02/U.S.-Indo-Pacific-Strategy.pdf ; and “United States Strategic Approach to 
the People’s Republic of China,” White House, May 2020, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/U.S.-Strategic-Approach-to-The-Peoples-Republic-of-China-Report-5.24v1.pdf .
367 Robert O’Brien, “The Chinese Communist Party’s Ideology and Global Ambitions,” University 
of Southern California US-China Institute, June 24, 2020, https://china.usc.edu/robert-
o%E2%80%99brien-chinese-communist-party%E2%80%99s-ideology-and-global-ambitions-
june-24-2020.
368 Farhad Manjoo, “Dealing With China Isn’t Worth the Moral Cost,” New York Times, October 9, 2019, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/09/opinion/china-houston-rockets.html . 
369 Anonymous, “The Longer Telegram: Toward a New American China Strategy,” Atlantic Council, 
January 28, 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/atlantic-council-strategy-paper-series/
the-longer-telegram/.
370 The Broken Promises of China’s WTO Accession: Reprioritizing Human Rights: A Hearing Before the 
Congressional-Executive Commission on China , 115th Cong. (2017) (testimony of Sophie Richardson, 
March 1, 2017), https://www.cecc.gov/sites/chinacommission.house.gov/files/CECC%20Hearing%20
-%20WTO%20-%20Sophie%20Richardson%20-1Mar17.pdf.
371 “A Human Rights Approach to US-China Policy,” Human Rights Watch, February 17, 2021, https://
www.hrw.org/news/2021/02/17/human-rights-approach-us-china-policy .
372 Kate O’Keeffe, Heather Somerville, and Yang Jie, “U.S. Companies Aid China’s Bid for Chip 
Dominance Despite Security Concerns,” Wall Street Journal , November 12, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/
articles/u-s-firms-aid-chinas-bid-for-chip-dominance-despite-security-concerns-11636718400 .
373 Zach Dorfman, “Tech Giants Are Giving China a Vital Edge in Espionage,” Foreign Policy, December 
23, 2020, https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/12/23/china-tech-giants-process-stolen-data-spy-agencies/ ; 
Katja Drinhausen and Vincent Brusee, “China’s Social Credit System in 2021: From Fragmentation 
Towards Integration,” MERICS, March 3, 2021, https://merics.org/en/report/chinas-social-credit-
system-2021-fragmentation-towards-integration ; Ryan Hass, “Assessing China’s ‘Common Prosperity’ 
Campaign,” Brookings Institution, September 9, 2021, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-
chaos/2021/09/09/assessing-chinas-common-prosperity-campaign/ ; and Ann Listerud, “Chinese 
Communist Party Cells in Private Companies: Though Not Yet Universal, Increasingly Situated to Play 
Greater Roles in Corporate Governance,” Sayari, April 7, 2021, https://sayari.com/resources/chinese-
communist-party-cells-in-private-companies-though-not-yet-universal-increasingly-situated-to-play-
greater-roles-in-corporate-governance/ .
374 Thomas Carothers, “Does Democracy Promotion Have a Future?,” in Democracy and Development , 
ed. Bernard Berendsen (Amsterdam: KIT Publishers, 2008), https://carnegieendowment.org/files/
DemocracyDevm-Carothers-sec.pdf .
375 Clayton Thomas, Jeremy M. Sharp, Christopher M. Blanchard, and Christina L. Arabia, “Arms Sales in 
the Middle East: Trends and Analytical Perspectives for U.S. Policy,” Congressional Research Service, 
November 23, 2020, https://sgp.fas.org/crs/mideast/R44984.pdf .

===== PDF_PAGE 167 =====
154 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
376 “Addition of Entities to the Entity List, Revision of Entry on the Entity List, and Removal of Entities 
From the Entity List,” Commerce Department, 85 Fed. Reg. 83,416 (December 22, 2020), https://
public-inspection.federalregister.gov/2020-28031.pdf .
377 Cate Cadell, “Drone Company DJI Obscured Ties to Chinese State Funding, Documents Show,” 
Washington Post, February 1, 2022, https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2022/02/01/
china-funding-drones-dji-us-regulators/ ; Blake Schmidt and Ashlee Vance, “DJI Won the Drone Wars, 
and Now It’s Paying the Price,” Bloomberg Businessweek , March 26, 2020, https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/features/2020-03-26/dji-s-drone-supremacy-comes-at-a-price ; Matt Rivers, Max Foster, and James 
Griffiths, “Disturbing Video Shows Hundreds of Blindfolded Prisoners in Xinjiang,” CNN, October 7, 
2019, https://www.cnn.com/2019/10/06/asia/china-xinjiang-video-intl-hnk/index.html ; and Liselotte 
Mas, “Drone Video Shows Blindfolded, Handcuffed Prisoners in China’s Xinjiang Uyghur Region,” 
France 24, September 25, 2019, https://observers.france24.com/en/20190925-drone-video-shows-mass-
displacement-prisoners-china-xinjiang-uyghur-region .
378 John Venable and Lora Ries, “DJI Placed on the Entity List for Human Rights Abuses, but Concerns 
About Data Security Should Not Be Overlooked,” Heritage Foundation, January 7, 2021, https://www.
heritage.org/cybersecurity/commentary/dji-placed-the-entity-list-human-rights-abuses-concerns-about-
data.
379 “Treasury Identifies Eight Chinese Tech Firms as Part of the Chinese Military-Industrial Complex,” 
press release, Treasury Department, December 16, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/
jy0538.
380 Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act of 2021, Public Law No. 117-78, § 3, https://www.govinfo.gov/
content/pkg/PLAW-117publ78/pdf/PLAW-117publ78.pdf.
381 Zak Doffman, “Is Microsoft AI Helping to Deliver China’s ‘Shameful’ Xinjiang Surveillance State?,” 
Forbes, March 15, 2019, https://www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/2019/03/15/microsoft-denies-new-
links-to-chinas-surveillance-state-but-its-complicated/ ; and Jacob Fromer, Cissy Zhoum, and Finbarr 
Bermingham, “US Farm Brand John Deere at Forefront of Surging Cotton Machinery Sales to Xinjiang, 
as Human Rights Sanctions Loom,” South China Morning Post , August 8, 2020, https://www.scmp.com/
economy/china-economy/article/3096510/us-farm-brand-john-deere-forefront-surging-cotton-machinery .
382 Executive Order 14032, “Addressing the Threat From Securities Investments That Finance Certain 
Companies of the People’s Republic of China,” June 3, 2021, https://www.federalregister.gov/
documents/2021/06/07/2021-12019/addressing-the-threat-from-securities-investments-that-finance-
certain-companies-of-the-peoples ; and Tamer A. Soliman, Andrew Olmem, Timothy J. Keeler, and Jason 
Hungerford, “US Investment Ban Targeting Companies Deemed Linked to Chinese Military Expanded 
to Chinese Surveillance Technology Sector,” Mayer Brown, June 9, 2021, https://www.mayerbrown.com/
en/perspectives-events/publications/2021/06/us-investment-ban-targeting-companies-deemed-linked-to-
chinese-military-expanded-to-chinese-surveillance-technology-sector .
383 “Frequently Asked Questions: Chinese Military Company Sanctions” (question 900), Treasury 
Department, June 3, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/faqs/topic/5671 .
384 “Fact Sheet: Executive Order Addressing the Threat From Securities Investments That Finance Certain 
Companies of the People’s Republic of China,” White House, June 3, 2021, https://www.whitehouse.
gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/06/03/fact-sheet-executive-order-addressing-the-threat-from-
securities-investments-that-finance-certain-companies-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china/ .
385 “Treasury Sanctions Perpetrators of Serious Human Rights Abuse on International Human Rights Day,” 
press release, Treasury Department, December 10, 2021, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/
jy0526.
386 UIGHUR Act of 2019, S. 178, 116th Cong. (2019), https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-
bill/178/text; and Matt Spetalnick, Patricia Zengerle, David Brunnstrom, “U.S. Uighur Bill’s Threat to 
Surveillance Economy Puts China on Offensive,” Reuters, December 5, 2019, https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-usa-china-xinjiang/u-s-uighur-bills-threat-to-surveillance-economy-puts-china-on-offensive-
idUSKBN1Y92TV.
387 Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act of 2020, Public Law No. 116-145.

===== PDF_PAGE 168 =====
JON BATEMAN 155 
388 “Joint Statement on the Export Controls and Human Rights Initiative,” White House, December 10, 
2021, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/12/10/joint-statement-on-the-
export-controls-and-human-rights-initiative/ .
389 “White House Announces Launch of the International Grand Challenges on Democracy-Affirming 
Technologies for the Summit for Democracy,” White House, December 8, 2021, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/12/08/white-house-announces-launch-of-the-international-
grand-challenges-on-democracy-affirming-technologies-for-the-summit-for-democracy/ .
390 These are just a few of the possibilities. See Winnona DeSombre et al., “Countering Cyber Proliferation: 
Zeroing in on Access-as-a-Service,” Atlantic Council, March 1, 2021, https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/
in-depth-research-reports/report/countering-cyber-proliferation-zeroing-in-on-access-as-a-service/#policy
recommendations .
391 Commerce Department, “Commerce Adds NSO Group and Other Foreign Companies to Entity List for 
Malicious Cyber Activities,” November 3, 2021, https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2021/11/
commerce-adds-nso-group-and-other-foreign-companies-entity-list ; Yonah Jeremy Bob, “Defense Min. 
Limits Countries Israeli Cyber Companies Can Sell to Post-NSO – Report,” Jerusalem Post , November 
25, 2021, https://www.jpost.com/israel-news/defense-min-limits-countries-israeli-cyber-companies-
can-sell-to-post-nso-report-687004 ; and Yonah Jeremy Bob, “Israeli Defense Ministry Tightens Cyber 
Exports Post-NSO Scandal,” Jerusalem Post , December 6, 2021, https://www.jpost.com/breaking-news/
defense-ministry-to-tighten-regulation-on-cyber-exports-687998 .
392 “Join the Effort to Create A Bill of Rights for an Automated Society,” White House, November 10, 2021, 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/11/10/join-the-effort-to-create-a-bill-of-rights-for-
an-automated-society/.

===== PDF_PAGE 169 =====
156 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
COUNTERING UNFAIR CHINESE ECONOMIC PRACTICES AND 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEFT
393 Two fairly exhaustive lists of U.S. grievances compiled by the Trump administration include “Findings of 
the Investigation Into China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, Intellectual 
Property, and Innovation Under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974,” USTR, March 22, 2018, https://
ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Section%20301%20FINAL.PDF ; and “How China’s Economic Aggression 
Threatens the Technologies and Intellectual Property of the United States and the World,” White House, 
June 18, 2018, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/FINAL-China-
Technology-Report-6.18.18-PDF.pdf.
394 “2021 China Business Climate Survey Report,” AmCham China, March 2021, https://www.
amchamchina.org/climate-survey/2021-business-climate-survey/ .
395 “Findings of the Investigation Into China’s Acts, Policies, and Practices Related to Technology Transfer, 
Intellectual Property, and Innovation Under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974,” USTR, March 
22, 2018, https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Section%20301%20FINAL.PDF ; “U.S. Accuses China 
of Violating Bilateral Anti-hacking Deal,” Reuters, November 9, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/
article/usa-china-cyber-idUKL2N1XK06K ; Ton Zuijdwijk, “Understanding the Intellectual Property 
Disputes between China and the United States,” Centre for International Governance Innovation, May 
15, 2019, https://www.cigionline.org/articles/understanding-intellectual-property-disputes-between-
china-and-united-states/ ; and Stephen Ezell, “False Promises II: The Continuing Gap Between China’s 
WTO Commitments and Its Practices,” Information Technology & Innovation Foundation, July 26, 
2021, https://itif.org/publications/2021/07/26/false-promises-ii-continuing-gap-between-chinas-wto-
commitments-and-its .
396 “Statement by the President Regarding Trade With China,” White House, June 15, 2018, https://
trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/statement-president-regarding-trade-china/ .
397 Jeanne Whalen, “Biden’s Commerce Secretary Pick Pledges a Tough Line on China but Doesn’t Detail 
How She’d Deal With Huawei,” Washington Post, January 26, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
technology/2021/01/26/gina-raimondo-confirmation-china/ .
398 “Statement From President Donald J. Trump on Additional Proposed Section 301 Remedies,” White 
House, April 5, 2018, https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/statement-president-
donald-j-trump-additional-proposed-section-301-remedies/ ; and Ana Swanson, “W.T.O. Says American 
Tariffs on China Broke Global Trade Rules,” New York Times, September 15, 2020, https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/09/15/business/economy/wto-trade-china-trump.html .
399 Jeffrey J. Schott and Euijin Jung, “In US-China Trade Disputes, the WTO Usually Sides With the 
United States,” PIIE, March 12, 2019, https://www.piie.com/blogs/trade-and-investment-policy-watch/
us-china-trade-disputes-wto-usually-sides-united-states .
400 Nina M. Hart and Brandon J. Murrill, “The World Trade Organization’s (WTO’s) Appellate Body: Key 
Disputes and Controversies,” Congressional Research Service, July 22, 2021, https://crsreports.congress.
gov/product/pdf/R/R46852; Gary Clyde Hufbauer, “WTO Judicial Appointments: Bad Omen for the 
Trading System,” PIIE, June 13, 2011, https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/wto-
judicial-appointments-bad-omen-trading-system ; Manfred Elsig, Mark Pollack, and Gregory Shaffer, 
“The U.S. Is Causing a Major Controversy in the World Trade Organization. Here’s What’s Happening,” 
Washington Post, June 6, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/06/06/
the-u-s-is-trying-to-block-the-reappointment-of-a-wto-judge-here-are-3-things-to-know/ ; Steve 
Charnovitz, “The Obama Administration’s Attack on Appellate Body Independence Shows the Need 
for Reforms,” International Economic Law and Policy Blog, September 22, 2016, https://worldtradelaw.
typepad.com/ielpblog/2016/09/the-obama-administrations-attack-on-appellate-body-independence-
shows-the-need-for-reforms-.html .
401 Brandon J. Murrill, “The WTO’s Appellate Body Loses Its Quorum: Is This the Beginning of the End 
for the ‘Rules-Based Trading System’?,” Congressional Research Service, December 19, 2019, https://
crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/LSB/LSB10385 ; and Marianne Schneider-Petsinger, “Reforming 
the World Trade Organization,” Chatham House, September 11, 2020, https://www.chathamhouse.
org/2020/09/reforming-world-trade-organization/04-dispute-settlement-crisis .

===== PDF_PAGE 170 =====
JON BATEMAN 157 
402 Bryce Baschuk, “Biden Picks Up Where Trump Left Off in Hard-Line Stances at WTO,” Bloomberg, 
February 22, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-02-22/biden-picks-up-where-trump-
left-off-in-hard-line-stances-at-wto .
403 WTO, “Principles of the Trading System,” https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/
fact2_e.htm . “WTO” here is used as shorthand for various international agreements, starting 
chronologically with the 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, that the WTO now 
oversees. The WTO regime is complemented by other international bodies that have also adopted 
nondiscrimination as a core economic principle. See “Guidelines for Recipient Country Investment 
Policies Relating to National Security,” Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 
2009, https://www.oecd.org/investment/investment-policy/43384486.pdf .
404 Bryce Baschuk, “Biden Picks Up Where Trump Left Off in Hard-Line Stances at WTO,” Bloomberg, 
February 22, 2021, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-02-22/biden-picks-up-where-trump-
left-off-in-hard-line-stances-at-wto .
405 A WTO panel reviewed this history at length in a landmark 2019 decision regarding Russia’s claim of 
a “national security exception” vis-à-vis Ukraine. “Russia – Measures Concerning Traffic in Transit: 
Report of the Panel” (Appendix), WTO, April 5, 2019, https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/SS/directdoc.
aspx?filename=q :/WT/DS/512R.pdf.
406 Peter Van den Bossche and Sarah Akpofure, “The Use and Abuse of the National Security Exception 
Under Article XXI(b)(iii) of the GATT 1994,” World Trade Institute, Working Paper no. 345, September 
15, 2020, https://www.wti.org/research/publications/1299/the-use-and-abuse-of-the-national-security-
exception-under-article-xxibiii-of-the-gatt-1994/ .
407 “2021 Trade Policy Agenda and 2020 Annual Report of the President of the United States on 
the Trade Agreements Program,” USTR, March 2021, https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/
reports/2021/2021%20Trade%20Agenda/Online%20PDF%202021%20Trade%20Policy%20
Agenda%20and%202020%20Annual%20Report.pdf .
408 “A Conversation With Ambassador Katherine Tai, U.S. Trade Representative,” Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, October 4, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/conversation-ambassador-
katherine-tai-us-trade-representative .
409 “Ambassador Katherine Tai’s Remarks as Prepared for Delivery on the World Trade Organization,” 
USTR, October 14, 2021, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/speeches-and-
remarks/2021/october/ambassador-katherine-tais-remarks-prepared-delivery-world-trade-organization .
410 “U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council Inaugural Joint Statement,” press release, USTR, September 
29, 2021, https://ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2021/september/us-eu-trade-
and-technology-council-inaugural-joint-statement .
411 “A Conversation With Ambassador Katherine Tai, U.S. Trade Representative,” Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, October 4, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/conversation-ambassador-
katherine-tai-us-trade-representative .

===== PDF_PAGE 171 =====
158 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
COMPETING AND LEADING IN STRATEGIC INDUSTRIES
412 Remco Zwetsloot et al., “China Is Fast Outpacing U.S. STEM PhD Growth,” Center for Security and 
Emerging Technology, August 2021, https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/china-is-fast-outpacing-
u-s-stem-phd-growth/ ; “The Human Capital Report 2016,” World Economic Forum, 2016, https://
www3.weforum.org/docs/HCR2016_Main_Report.pdf ; and “Gross Domestic Spending on R&D,” 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2021, https://data.oecd.org/rd/gross-
domestic-spending-on-r-d.htm .
413 Robert Greene and Paul Triolo, “Will China Control the Global Internet Via Its Digital Silk Road?,” 
SupChina, May 8, 2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/05/08/will-china-control-global-internet-
via-its-digital-silk-road-pub-81857.
414 For a review of this history, see James L. Schoff, “U.S.-Japan Technology Policy Coordination: Balancing 
Technonationalism With a Globalized World,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, June 29, 
2020, https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/06/29/u.s.-japan-technology-policy-coordination-balancing-
technonationalism-with-globalized-world-pub-82176 .
415 Mark Scott and Emily Birnbaum, “How Washington and Big Tech Won the Global Tax Fight,” Politico, 
June 30, 2021, https://www.politico.eu/article/washington-big-tech-tax-talks-oecd/ .
416 James Andrew Lewis, “Mapping the National Security Industrial Base: Policy Shaping Issues,” CSIS, 
May 19, 2021, https://www.csis.org/analysis/mapping-national-security-industrial-base-policy-shaping-
issues.
417 The blue-ribbon Cyberspace Solarium Commission expressed a version of this concern: “Chinese national 
companies like Huawei are part of an integrated strategy to use predatory pricing to dominate and 
eventually monopolize key information and communications technology supply chains. The goal is to 
drive non-Chinese alternatives out of business, leaving the Chinese Communist Party and its business 
allies with a stranglehold on the global supply chain.” “Final Report,” Cyberspace Solarium Commission, 
March 2020, https://www.solarium.gov/report .
418 John S. McCain National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2019, Public Law No. 115-232, § 
1702(c)(1).
419 Commerce Department, “Review of Controls for Certain Emerging Technologies,” 83 Fed. Reg. 58,201 
(November 19, 2018), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/11/19/2018-25221/review-of-
controls-for-certain-emerging-technologies .
420 Peter Lichtenbaum, Victor Ban, and Lisa Ann Johnson, “Defining ‘Emerging Technologies’: Industry 
Weighs in on Potential New Export Controls,” China Business Review, April 17, 2019, https://www.
chinabusinessreview.com/defining-emerging-technologies-industry-weighs-in-on-potential-new-export-
controls/; Paul H. DeLaney, “Business Roundtable Comments on the Advance Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking (ANPRM) Regarding the Review of Controls for Certain Emerging Technologies,” January 
12, 2019, https://www.businessroundtable.org/business-roundtable-comments-on-the-advance-notice-
of-proposed-rulemaking-anprm-regarding-the-review-of-controls-for-certain-emerging-technologies ; and 
Linda Dempsey, “Comments of the National Association of Manufacturers on the Review of Controls 
for Certain Emerging Technologies (Docket BIS 2018-0024),” National Association of Manufacturers, 
January 9, 2019, http://documents.nam.org/iea/NAM%20Comments%20on%20Emerging%20
Technology%20for%20BIS%20(final).pdf .
421 Council on Governmental Relations et al., “RIN 0694-AH80, Identification and Review of Controls for 
Certain Foundational Technologies ANPRM,” November 2020, https://www.cogr.edu/sites/default/files/
AAU_COGR_ACE_APLU_AAMC_ANPRM%20Foundational%20Technologies.pdf .
422 Steven W. Popper and Caroline Wagner, “Identifying Critical Technologies in the United States: A 
Review of the Federal Effort,” Journal of Forecasting 22, no. 2–3 (2003), https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/5141648_Identifying_critical_technologies_in_the_United_States_A_review_of_the_
federal_effort ; and Mary Ellen Mogee, Technology Policy and Critical Technologies: A Summary of Recent 
Reports (Washington DC: National Academies Press, 1991), https://www.nap.edu/read/20840/chapter/5 .
423 “National Critical Technologies Report—Appendix A: National Critical Technologies List,” White 
House, March 1995, https://clintonwhitehouse3.archives.gov/WH/EOP/OSTP/CTIformatted/AppA/
appa.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 172 =====
JON BATEMAN 159 
424 “National Strategy for Critical and Emerging Technologies,” White House, October 2020, https://
trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/National-Strategy-for-CET.pdf .
425 “Critical and Emerging Technologies List Update,” National Science and Technology Council, February 
2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/02-2022-Critical-and-Emerging-
Technologies-List-Update.pdf.
426 Emphasis in original.
427 “Asymmetric Competition: A Strategy for China & Technology,” China Strategy Group, Fall 2020, 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/20463382-final-memo-china-strategy-group-axios-1 ; and 
Jeffrey Ding and Allan Dafoe, “The Logic of Strategic Assets: From Oil to AI,” Security Studies 30, no. 2 
(2021), https://doi.org/10.1080/09636412.2021.1915583. 
428 The United States does not have a single company that competes on a one-for-one basis with Huawei 
or ZTE in 5G telecommunications equipment markets. However, U.S. partners Finland (Nokia) and 
Sweden (Ericcson) do compete in aspects of these markets, and the United States has an interest in 
preventing Chinese dominance. Moreover, U.S. companies support various aspects of the 5G supply 
chain, and could do so more fully and effectively if the open, software-based 5G standard known as 
O-RAN continues to develop as a viable alternative to the closed, hardware-based systems sold by 
Huawei and ZTE. 
429 Justin Hodiak and Scott W. Harold, “Can China Become the World Leader in Semiconductors?,” The 
Diplomat, September 25, 2020, https://thediplomat.com/2020/09/can-china-become-the-world-leader-in-
semiconductors/; Christopher A. Thomas, “Lagging But Motivated: The State of China’s Semiconductor 
Industry,” Brookings TechStream (blog), Brookings Institution, January 7, 2021, https://www.brookings.
edu/techstream/lagging-but-motivated-the-state-of-chinas-semiconductor-industry/ ; Arjun Kharpal, 
“China Is Ramping Up Its Own Chip Industry Amid a Brewing Tech War,” CNBC, June 4 2019, 
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/06/04/china-ramps-up-own-semiconductor-industry-amid-the-trade-
war.html; and Jordan Schneider, “China’s Chip Industry: Running Faster But Still Falling Behind,” 
Rhodium Group, April 22, 2021, https://rhg.com/research/china-chips/ .
430 Alexandra Alper, Toby Sterling, and Stephen Nellis, “Trump Administration Pressed Dutch Hard to 
Cancel China Chip-equipment Sale: Sources,” Reuters, January 6, 2020, https://www.reuters.com/
article/us-asml-holding-usa-china-insight/trump-administration-pressed-dutch-hard-to-cancel-china-
chip-equipment-sale-sources-idUSKBN1Z50HN ; and Justin Hodiak and Scott W. Harold, “Can China 
Become the World Leader in Semiconductors?,” The Diplomat, September 25, 2020, https://thediplomat.
com/2020/09/can-china-become-the-world-leader-in-semiconductors/ .
431 Karen Freifeld, “Huawei Gets U.S. Approvals to Buy Auto Chips, Sparking Blow Back,” Reuters, August 
25, 2021, https://www.reuters.com/business/autos-transportation/exclusive-us-approves-licenses-huawei-
buy-auto-chips-sources-2021-08-25/.
432 For an explanation of this issue, see Evan Burke, “Trump-Era Policies Toward Chinese STEM Talent: 
A Need for Better Balance,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 25, 2021, https://
carnegieendowment.org/2021/03/25/trump-era-policies-toward-chinese-stem-talent-need-for-better-
balance-pub-84137.
433 Ellen Nakashima and Jeanne Whalen, “Key Security Agencies Split Over Whether to Blacklist Former 
Huawei Smartphone Unit,” Washington Post, September 19, 2021, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
national-security/huawei-honor-security-export/2021/09/19/6d49d27c-17ef-11ec-b976-f4a43b740aeb_
story.html.
434 Michael McCaul et al., letter to Gina Raimondo, August 6, 2021, https://gop-foreignaffairs.house.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2021/08/8-6-21-CTF-Letter-to-Sec-Raimondo-RE-Honor-Device-Co-1.pdf .
435 Christine Fox, “An Entwined AI Future: Resistance Is Futile,” 2020, JHU APL, https://www.jhuapl.edu/
assessing-us-china-technology-connections/dist/071c25aa35e135f3c20c2f53f182de11.pdf .
436 Regarding China’s potential advantages in certain AI sub-fields, one recent study noted that “a 
disproportionate share of China’s highly cited and top-venue [AI] publications include publications on 
general-purpose computer vision research, as well as applications of AI to surveillance and industry.” 
Ashwin Acharya and Brian Dunn, “Comparing U.S. and Chinese Contributions to High-Impact AI 
Research,” Center for Security and Emerging Technology, January 2022, https://cset.georgetown.edu/
publication/comparing-u-s-and-chinese-contributions-to-high-impact-ai-research/ .

===== PDF_PAGE 173 =====
160 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
437 Rand Waltzman et al., “Maintaining the Competitive Advantage in Artificial Intelligence and Machine 
Learning,” RAND Corporation, 2020, https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA200-1.html .
438 Sam Shead, “Why the Buzz Around DeepMind Is Dissipating as It Transitions From Games to Science,” 
CNBC, June 5, 2020, https://www.cnbc.com/2020/06/05/google-deepmind-alphago-buzz-dissipates.
html.
439 A much more detailed and comprehensive set of proposals, related primarily but not exclusively to 
AI, can be found in the report of the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence. “Final 
Report,” National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence, March 2021, https://www.nscai.gov/
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Full-Report-Digital-1.pdf .
440 Robert D. Atkinson, “The Case for a National Industrial Strategy to Counter China’s Technological 
Rise,” Infornation Technology & Innovation Foundation, April 13, 2020, https://itif.org/
publications/2020/04/13/case-national-industrial-strategy-counter-chinas-technological-rise .
441 Robert D. Atkinson, “The Case for a National Industrial Strategy to Counter China’s Technological 
Rise,” Infornation Technology & Innovation Foundation, April 13, 2020, https://itif.org/
publications/2020/04/13/case-national-industrial-strategy-counter-chinas-technological-rise .

===== PDF_PAGE 174 =====
JON BATEMAN 161 
OBTAINING GENERAL LEVERAGE OVER CHINA
442 Michael S. Schmidt and Maggie Haberman, “Bolton Was Concerned That Trump Did Favors for 
Autocratic Leaders, Book Says,” New York Times, June 17, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/27/
us/politics/john-bolton-trump-book-barr.html ; and “Trump Says Huawei Could Be Part of Trade Deal,” 
BBC, May 24, 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/business-48392021 .
443 John D. McKinnon, “Trump Says ‘There Has Been No Folding’ Over Possible ZTE Deal,” Wall Street 
Journal, May 16, 2018, https://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-says-there-has-been-no-folding-over-
possible-zte-deal-1526494867.
444 Sarah Zheng, “US-China Relations: Meng Wanzhou’s Return Clears One Roadblock to a Reset,” South 
China Morning Post, September 27, 2021, https://www.scmp.com/news/china/diplomacy/article/3150302/
us-china-relations-meng-wanzhous-return-clears-one-roadblock .
445 Sha Hua and Timothy Puko, “U.S.-China Surprise Cooperation on Climate Change Driven by Biden 
and Xi’s Need for Deal,” Wall Street Journal , November 12, 2021, https://www.wsj.com/articles/biden-
and-xi-pressed-for-u-s-china-climate-statement-11636718318.

===== PDF_PAGE 175 =====
162 U.S.-CHINA TECHNOLOGICAL “DECOUPLING”: A STRATEGY AND POLICY FRAMEWORK 
SHAPING U.S. DOMESTIC NARRATIVES
446 “High-Risk Series: Dedicated Leadership Needed to Address Limited Progress in Most High-Risk 
Areas,” Government Accountability Office, March 2, 2021, https://files.gao.gov/reports/GAO-21-119SP/
index.html.
447 Yajana Sharma, “Top US Research Universities Freeze Ties With Huawei,” University World News, 
February 11, 2019, https://www.universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20190211124159161.
448 Georgia Wells, Jeff Horwitz, and Aruna Viswanatha, “Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg Stoked 
Washington’s Fears About TikTok,” Wall Street Journal , August 23, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/
facebook-ceo-mark-zuckerberg-stoked-washingtons-fears-about-tiktok-11598223133 .
449 “Statement by Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin on the President’s Decision Regarding the Acquisition by 
ByteDance Ltd. of the U.S. Business of musical.ly,” press release, Treasury Department, August 14, 2020, 
https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/sm1094 .
450 Georgia Wells, Aaron Tilley, and John D. McKinnon, “How Dark Horse Oracle Became TikTok’s 
Leading Suitor,” Wall Street Journal , September 14, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/oracle-tiktok-
deal-trump-politics-microsoft-11600129980.
451 Robert Chesney, “TikTok, WeChat, and Biden’s New Executive Order: What You Need to Know,” 
Lawfare, June 9, 2021, https://www.lawfareblog.com/tiktok-wechat-and-bidens-new-executive-order-
what-you-need-know.

===== PDF_PAGE 176 =====
163 
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR 
INTERNATIONAL PEACE
The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is a unique global network of policy 
research centers in Russia, China, Europe, the Middle East, India, and the United States. 
Our mission, dating back more than a century, is to advance peace through analysis and 
development of fresh policy ideas and direct engagement and collaboration with decision-
makers in government, business, and civil society. Working together, our centers bring the 
inestimable benefit of multiple national viewpoints to bilateral, regional, and global issues.
TECHNOLOGY AND INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS PROGRAM
The Carnegie T echnology and International Affairs Program (TIA) helps governments and 
industries reduce large-scale international risks of new technologies and related services. 
Recognizing that commercial actors control many of the most germane technologies, TIA 
identifies best practices and incentives that can motivate industry stakeholders to pursue 
growth by enhancing rather than undermining international relations.
TIA’s work informs and is informed by direct dialogues among thought-leaders, senior of-
ficials, and executives in key countries. We share the data, insights, and policy recommen- 
dations that result in reports, commentaries, and web tools. Carnegie’s regional centers and 
networks in the United States, China, Europe, India, and Russia provide a widely respected 
international platform for promoting our policy proposals.

===== PDF_PAGE 177 =====
CarnegieEndowment.org
