
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource GovernanceDr Wei Jigang, Dr Zhao Changwen, Felix Preston, Rob Bailey and Siân Bradley
Navigating the 
New Normal
A joint DRC and Chatham House report | January 2016 
Felix Preston, Rob Bailey and Siân Bradley (Chatham House)
Dr Wei Jigang and Dr Zhao Changwen (DRC)
China and Global Resource Governance

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
i 
Contents
 Executive summary ii
1 Introduction 1
2 Key concerns for China in the new normal 5
3 The evolution of global resource governance 19
4 Key challenges in global resource governance 24
5 Geopolitics, global governance and resources 35
6 Recommendations for China and the 
 international community 51
7 Conclusions 60
 Annex: China’s resource interdependencies 61
 Acronyms and abbreviations 69
 Acknowledgements 72
 About the authors 73
 Notes and references 74

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
ii 
Executive summary 
China’s new role in the global governance of natural resources is coming to the fore against a 
backdrop of profound uncertainty, driven by the convergence of three interlinked trends. At home, 
China’s leaders are navigating the structural shift to slower but higher-quality growth, a phase of 
development referred to as the ‘new normal’, while facing considerable environmental and resource 
security challenges. Globally, the slowdown in China’s economy has sent reverberations through 
commodity markets, pulling the plug on the decade-long commodities ‘super cycle’. Meanwhile, China 
is taking on a growing role in global governance, from the G20 and multilateral development banks, 
to its regional partnerships in Latin America and Africa.
During the resources boom of the last decade, policy-makers and businesses in consumer countries 
were focused on high and volatile resource prices. The risks posed by resource nationalism in producer 
countries were seen in the proliferation of export restrictions and the increase in investment disputes. 
Today, the tables have turned, leaving producer countries facing economic pressure from falling 
revenues and investments. Many organizations have called on governments to phase out subsidies 
for fossil fuels and other natural resources while prices are low. The international policy debate is 
shifting to the immediate challenges presented by a massive oversupply of many energy and mineral 
commodities, and the longer-term risk of ‘stranded assets’. 
These new resource realities will provide the context for China’s growing global role, as well as 
setting the tenor of its relations with producer countries. Over the past decade, narratives around 
China often focused on its real or perceived impacts from resource production overseas and 
consumption at home. In the next, China’s approach to resource security and sustainability will help 
define its reputation, and whether it is perceived as a responsible actor on the world stage and as 
a development partner. The collection of international narratives, norms, rules and organizations 
that currently guides resource production, trade and consumption – what we call ‘global resource 
governance’ in this report – will provide the framework. 
Much political leadership will be required to overcome the barriers to China assuming a more 
active role in global resource governance. On the one hand, there has been slow progress in expanding 
China’s role in organizations from the World Bank to the International Energy Agency (IEA). On 
the other, new instruments or processes initiated by China can be seen as a challenge to the existing 
rules-based order, as the US reaction to the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 
(AIIB) demonstrated. Yet developments such as the US–China Joint Presidential Statement on Climate 
Change in September 2015,
1
 ahead of the Paris Climate Conference, show that it is possible to forge 
cooperation and boost the prospects for progress on public goods at the multilateral level, even in 
politically fraught areas.
China’s international role on natural resources is also closely tied to ongoing reforms at home. 
The introduction of ‘ecological civilization’ as a guiding principle for China’s development at the 
Communist Party’s 17th Congress in 2007 marked a recognition of the need not only to address 
China’s domestic challenges such as air quality and water scarcity but also shift to an environmentally 
sustainable model of economic development.
2
 In 2015 China’s leaders set out the key incentives,

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
iii 
accountability and mechanisms to deliver the ecological civilization in China’s 13th Five-Year Plan. 
Central elements of this vision, such as building sustainable cities, pursuing environmentally-friendly 
economic growth and developing the circular economy
3
 will have major impacts on China’s future 
resource consumption and import needs. 
Globally, the speed and scale of the economic realignments have taken most experts and policy-
makers by surprise – in many respects, China’s new normal is the world’s new normal. The greatest 
challenge that China’s government faces is managing a shift to slower but higher-quality growth. It 
is clear that the ramifications of this reach far beyond the confines of the Chinese economy or global 
commodity markets; yet the situation remains fluid and the nature of a new equilibrium is difficult 
to predict. This only makes it more urgent to consider the strategic and practical options available to 
policy-makers, both in China and around the world.
This report is the result of two years of joint research between Chatham House and the Development 
Research Center of the State Council (DRC), including six expert workshops in China and conversations 
with international organizations. It discusses key policy areas in global resource governance as they 
relate to China – in light of recent falls in commodity prices, China’s shifting economic situation, and its 
growing global role in the ‘new normal’. The scope of the research is limited to non-renewable energy, 
metals and mineral resources; throughout this report, the term ‘resources’ refers to these commodities. 
Other traded commodities such as agricultural goods are not included, and land, water and air are 
discussed only in the context of their important linkages with energy and metals. 
The report considers the costs and benefits of a more active role for China in global resources 
governance. It recognizes that different commodities face different challenges and require different 
governance frameworks, and that different regions require context-specific responses. The report also 
considers the risks of more limited engagement of China and other new actors, which could mean 
declining relevance for existing processes and institutions that govern resource production, trade 
and consumption, and a diminished capacity to tackle longer-term challenges like climate change. 
Key findings 
It is time to upgrade global resource governance
Current market conditions could present a ‘window of opportunity’ to implement reforms in 
challenging areas, but progress will depend on political leadership. Lower prices and diminished 
tensions over resource availability create a more favourable environment for discussing governance 
reforms, but softer markets may breed complacency among governments – with the risk that progress 
is not locked down before markets tighten again and tensions rise. China could seize the opportunity 
to promote changes that enhance its resilience to future price rises and falls, and that are adaptive 
to changing environmental conditions.
The key goals for global resource governance include maintaining functioning global markets; 
alleviating the negative impacts associated with today’s resource production and consumption 
patterns; and avoiding or managing the tensions that arise between countries around natural 
resources. In a broader context, resource security and sustainability cannot be achieved unless 
challenges such as water scarcity, pollution and climate change are adequately addressed.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
iv 
Unfortunately, there is little ‘low-hanging fruit’, especially in organizations that have been the linchpin of 
rules-based governance for decades. Due to stalled negotiations on the Doha round, for example, there 
is little immediate prospect of stronger rules on export controls at the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
In the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), key issues are still unresolved, particularly 
where continental shelf drilling and seabed mining touch upon matters of sovereignty and freedom 
of navigation. While recent ‘association agreements’ between the IEA and non-OECD countries 
demonstrate some progress, opening the IEA to emerging economies continues to prove challenging, 
despite the shrinking share of global oil demand among its existing member countries.
4
As confidence in multilateral processes has eroded, global resource governance has become less 
formal. Innovation has increasingly come from ‘coalitions of the willing’, often with non-state actors 
playing a leading role. This has helped global resource governance respond to new challenges, but it 
has inevitably led to a more fragmented and diverse set of processes and institutions. While non-state 
actors play a valuable and important role in resource governance, states continue to have the unique 
fiscal, regulatory and security capacities to address many of the critical challenges. 
Meaningful progress cannot be achieved without China
Given its unique position in resources markets, as a major producer and the world’s largest consumer 
and trader of resources, there is no global resource governance without China. It has responsibility to 
take a more important role, as well as a huge stake in forging more effective governance. Moreover, 
China is well placed to help progress a more effective global resource governance regime. It has a wide 
sphere of influence: among developing countries, as a result of the increasing trade and investment 
interdependencies and its own development success; with emerging economies, among which it 
already plays an active role; and with developed countries as the second-largest economy in the 
world and a ‘rising power’.
A new strategic vision for China and resources governance could build on a wealth of analysis in 
specific areas of policy-making. Many experts have proposed an expanded role for China in global 
energy governance, via the IEA as well as the International Energy Forum (IEF) and the Energy 
Charter Treaty.
5
 Detailed work has also been undertaken on China’s future roles in the Arctic and on 
the law of the sea.
6
 Chatham House has explored China’s potential role in the supervision of metals 
and minerals markets.
7
Such a vision would require China to take a more active role in global governance. Even in the 
new normal, China’s growing resource demands suggest that the benefits of greater engagement 
in multilateral governance are likely to outweigh the potential costs. Moreover, without China’s 
engagement today or in the future, any norms, rules and institutions will provide partial solutions 
at best. At the same time, however, China’s current stage of development and capacities for 
participation will necessitate a step-by-step approach.
China will need to be both innovative and pragmatic in its approach
Although progress on resource governance is needed in multilateral forums, the fact remains that 
currently the most headway is being made by non-state actors working through informal channels. 
In a world of shifting economic relations and increasingly dispersed power, engaging with new 
actors will be critical to developing sustainable solutions to the greatest challenges in global resource

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
v 
governance. To maximize its influence at the global level, China will need to mobilize Chinese 
businesses, universities, think-tanks and NGOs at the national and city level. In the past, China has 
found it difficult to engage effectively with informal processes such as these. 
In an increasingly interconnected global resource economy, where common interests require 
constraints on individual government action, the creation of global public goods rests upon the 
willingness of states to modify or adapt national policies. As for other emerging economies, a 
key question for China is how to balance concern for its guiding foreign policy principle of non-
interference in the internal affairs of other countries with the need for governance arrangements 
that establish obligations on states.
Unconventional alliances could unlock reform in some areas. China’s competitors in an ungoverned 
resource market are its potential allies in shaping global resource governance. As major resource 
importers, Japan, South Korea and the EU share many of the same concerns as China. Norms are 
spread more easily through coalitions of states with shared resource interests (especially across 
different regions) than through unilateral promotion.
The new Belt and Road initiative, a plan to create a network of overland and maritime infrastructure 
following the old ‘Silk Road’ routes, represents an opportunity to show China’s commitment to 
sustainable development on the world stage, via win-win efforts with partner countries along the 
routes. Although the scope stretches beyond resources, the new silk roads are important testing grounds 
for China’s management of natural resource challenges, from high-quality investment practices and 
protecting sensitive environments to enhanced technology cooperation and the circular economy. If the 
initiative can be used to demonstrate China’s willingness and capacity to unlock some of the deadlocks 
in global resource governance, this will go a long way to reassuring those who remain sceptical or even 
critical of China’s intentions. 
New modes of cooperation are needed 
Industrialized countries could do more to indicate their willingness to seek more effective 
arrangements with China and other emerging economies. Inflexibility risks pushing China and other 
countries away from existing processes and towards alternative arrangements. Moreover, without 
effective coordination, the risk is that opportunities may be missed to work with emerging economies 
to ensure that new institutions like the BRICS’ New Development Bank and the AIIB bridge important 
gaps in global resource governance, operate to high standards and avoid unnecessary duplication.
The next phase of China’s ‘going out’ strategy will create room for constructive dialogues. As 
Chinese investment in the resource sectors of developing countries has increased, concerns have 
arisen about the social impacts and employment of Chinese instead of local workers.
8
 Yet fears of 
‘resource grabbing’ have not come to pass and Chinese companies have generally added to global 
supplies, rather than tying up resources for their home markets.
9
 There is also evidence that 
Chinese firms are learning from past experience, and authorities are developing clearer guidelines 
for overseas investment.
10
 Moreover, Chinese overseas investment is increasingly moving up the 
value chain towards manufacturing and technology. 
China can play a growing role as a development partner through enhanced South–South cooperation 
activities. China has a wealth of technical and policy experience that can be relevant to such resource-
producing and -consuming developing countries. Meanwhile, many developed country donors, for

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
vi 
whom resource governance and sustainable development are strategic priorities, are seeking ways to 
engage with China and other emerging donors. New modes of development partnership could help 
progress common resource governance priorities while deepening strategic relationships.
Changes in China’s economy present opportunities and risks
The most important consequences for resource use and sustainability in the medium term will arise 
not only from changes in China’s growth rate but also from changes in its economic model. Avoiding 
unnecessary energy and resource consumption can help ‘decouple’ economic growth from pollution 
and other negative environmental impacts in China.
11
 At the same time, the pace of China’s decoupling 
will be a major determinant of global environmental change. 
China’s success in resource efficiency, resource price reform and renewable energy provides it with 
credibility – one of the most precious soft power assets. China’s economy grew more than seven-
fold between 2000 and 2014, while its energy consumption tripled over the same period – a huge 
improvement in energy intensity.
12
 In renewable energy, China invests more than twice as much as 
the US, the next largest investor.
13
 But to leverage and build upon this, China will need to ensure 
consistency in resource policies at home and abroad. 
In the 13th Five-Year Plan (2016–20), China has the opportunity to ensure structural reforms that 
lay the foundations for a new development model, based on the principles of the circular economy 
and ecological civilization. Efficiency increases competitiveness, but it also reduces vulnerability to 
price hikes or supply problems. Renewed efforts will be needed to ensure China’s impressive progress 
on resource efficiency continues; a slowing of efficiency gains would ‘lock in’ vulnerability to further 
market instability. 
Recommendations
China should take a growing role in global resource governance, but policy-makers will need to 
consider the costs and benefits of specific options, as well as the perceptions and reactions of other 
countries. While China may seek to reform existing rules-based governance, this will not be possible 
without significant reform of these organizations. Similarly, where China and other emerging 
economies seek to establish new processes, all sides should put greater emphasis on harmonization 
and alignment with existing organizations, and on understanding the gaps they could address, rather 
than binary support or rejection. At what could be a watershed moment in the evolution of global 
governance, this report makes the following recommendations. 
As China expands its role in international resource markets, ensuring efficient, rules-based global 
resource markets will require its active participation: 
• China should leverage its unique position in metals markets by convening a high-level informal 
forum on metals and minerals markets, in order to facilitate ongoing dialogues and common 
policy and regulatory solutions.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
vii 
• It should explore practical options for improved dialogues and information, such as: 
• Proposing a regular ‘global metals and minerals report’ could help overcome some of the gaps 
in metals and minerals data. 
• Avoiding damaging export restrictions through win-win arrangements with producer countries.
• Working with developed and emerging economies to develop enhanced mechanisms for ‘early 
warning’ of possible trade disputes over resources.
• It should take the long-term view towards more comprehensive solutions, working with other 
major economies to unblock negotiations and build momentum in key multilateral forums such as 
the WTO, even where there is little prospect of immediate progress. 
Given China’s long-term outlook of rising dependency on key resources, ensuring secure and 
resilient resource flows will remain a strategic priority:
• China should explore joining the IEA, but this would need to be in parallel with IEA reforms. In 
addition to resolving the question of ‘treaty change’, moving the headquarters of the IEA to an 
Asian country (such as Singapore or South Korea) would send a strong political signal. 
• It should enhance global and regional energy security by: 
• Accelerating agreement of mutually acceptable common communication and response protocols 
between the IEA and the BRICS.
• Working towards a regional agreement to manage energy security risks in collaboration with 
South Korea, Japan, India and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
• Establishing an energy transaction database, between the BRICS countries and the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO), for example, and exploring options for an energy crisis 
early-warning mechanism and emergency response mechanism. 
• Encouraging national oil companies in the Middle East to develop oil storage in China and 
other Asian countries, as they do in South Korea and Japan.
• It should contribute to the security and sustainability of shipping routes by taking 
advantage of opportunities for enhanced cooperation and alignment with the Combined 
Maritime Forces. Current joint exercises could be used as a starting point for closer 
cooperation and capacity-building. 
Mainstreaming open and improved investment will be critical to the success of the Belt and Road 
initiative and new institutions including the AIIB: 
• China should consider joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) or other 
processes to encourage transparency in order to build institutional capacity and demonstrate 
international best practice in terms of governance within its companies. 
• Enhanced environmental monitoring and reporting is critical in order to establish baselines and 
track change internationally, including along the Silk Road. A more proactive strategy could 
include regularly publishing details on China’s overseas activities; being more open about 
problems and how they are being addressed; and expanded dialogues with non-state actors.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
viii 
• Policy-makers in China should establish an international benchmarking exercise for China’s 
investment frameworks and guidelines. This could be done in conjunction with the World Bank 
and OECD, for example, with the aim of aligning and consolidating international norms 
and guidelines. 
• Draw on international experience by expanding informal dialogues with major multinational 
companies, and include firms from other emerging economies. 
• Where resource projects pose unacceptably high risks from a political, technical or socio-
environmental standpoint, China could demonstrate its commitment to sustainable development 
by working towards principles for ‘no-go’ activities and areas, working with other major economies 
and resource producers. 
• China should demonstrate leadership with financial instruments through incentives for 
environmental, social and governance performance to scale up regional and bilateral investments 
through e.g. the Silk Road Fund, AIIB and the BRICS New Development Bank (NDB). 
• China should consider joining the Energy Charter Treaty in order to mitigate overseas investment 
risks in resources and infrastructure and develop a common set of investment rules with dispute 
resolution mechanisms.
 
Successfully fostering innovation and reform lies at the heart of China’s transition to the 
new normal: 
• A new strategy for China’s engagement in global resources governance should be established 
under the 13FYP, aligning China’s domestic and international agendas on resources. New 
inter-ministerial arrangements should coordinate activity on international resource issues 
across departments. 
• Advantage should be taken of new policy options towards 2020, ‘driving change down’ the value 
chain such as through supply chain standards or technology cooperation with supplier firms.
• China should leverage domestic regulations to contribute to change in overseas markets, for example, 
enhancing exchange listings and reporting requirements, and market access regulation. 
• China could use its G20 chair in 2016 to develop a coherent agenda for global resource 
governance, in partnership with Germany and India, the next two chairs of the G20. Possible 
topics could include the peaking and phasing out of coal, in light of national circumstances, 
and energy and resource pricing. 
• China should continue to upgrade its circular economy strategy within the 13FYP and seek 
international opportunities to promote this agenda. The short-term goal should be to align 
standards and build global markets for circular economy products, working with major markets 
and regional partners that are accelerating action in this area, including the EU, South Korea 
and Japan.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
1 
1. Introduction
China’s growing demand for the world’s natural resources has dominated global headlines since the turn 
of the century. In recent months, it has become clear that, after decades of rapid growth, this appetite is 
on the wane. The retreat can be seen in falling manufacturing indices, excess capacity in heavy industries 
and a profusion of non-performing loans. For some key commodities such as coal and iron ore there have 
been reductions in China’s imports in 2015, for the first time since the financial crisis.
14
Since 2014, China’s leaders have used the term ‘new normal’ to describe this new phase – or their 
new vision – for the Chinese economy. It describes China’s entry into a period of slower but more 
sustainable growth, ample employment,
15
 and an economy driven by consumption rather than exports 
and investment. China’s GDP could not grow at 10 per cent a year indefinitely; the key challenge is 
avoiding the ‘middle-income trap’.
16
As China is a major resource producer and both the world’s largest consumer of energy and its 
largest emitter of greenhouse gases,
17
 its economic transition has global ramifications for resource 
markets, environmental security and resource governance. At the same time, any changes in these 
international dimensions can also have profound feedback effects on China’s development. In these 
respects, China’s new normal is the world’s new normal. 
1.1 International resource markets
China’s slowing demand for resources has pulled the plug on a decade-long global commodity boom. 
Metal and mineral prices were first to slump, as early as 2011.
18
 A collapse in oil prices followed OPEC’s 
decision to maintain levels of production despite slowing demand in late 2014, which also placed 
further downward pressure on metals and minerals prices. Iron ore, aluminium, copper, gold and 
platinum prices are now at their lowest levels since the global financial crisis, although still double 
their levels of the early 2000s (see Figure 1). Despite the current period of low resource prices and 
demand, many of the underlying drivers of volatility in resource markets remain. 
The dramatic declines in commodity prices witnessed in recent months have turned the 
international political economy of resources on its head. Major resource importers such as the EU, 
Japan, India and China have benefited from reduced import bills. Meanwhile, the former beneficiaries 
of the commodity boom are struggling. Major mineral exporters like Chile, Peru and Zambia have 
been hit hard.
19
 The revenue from petroleum exports for OPEC members fell below $1 trillion in 
2014, the first time it had done so since 2010.
20
 Russia, Angola and Nigeria have cut government 
budgets,
21
 while emerging oil producers such as Ghana have turned to long-term oil funds for 
immediate budgetary support.
22
 The ‘resource curse’ – a term used for the paradoxical economic 
underperformance of resource-rich economies – has returned with a vengeance.
23

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
2 
Figure 1: Energy and metals and minerals price indices 2000–15 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
Metals and minerals, 2010=100Energy, 2010=100 
2014
2015
Nominal $ 
Source: Chatham House analysis of World Bank, Global Economic Monitor (GEM) Commodities (2015).
As well as reshuffling winners and losers, recent falls in commodity prices have led to a palpable shift 
in the nature of many resource security concerns. After record expenditure throughout the commodity 
boom, oil and gas companies are now facing tough choices over whether and where to invest in 
exploration and development, amid increasing commercial pressure to restructure and to increase their 
efficiency. Capital expenditure has already started to fall; around $380 billion worth of deepwater oil 
and complex gas developments were cancelled or postponed in 2015, and up to $1.5 trillion of potential 
investment is likely to be ‘uneconomic’ at oil prices of $50 per barrel, according to the consultancy 
Wood Mackenzie.
24
 In the mining sector, lower prices have triggered higher production levels and a 
fight for market share, increasing pressure on higher-cost, marginal producers.
25
 
1.2 Environmental security
The previous decade’s commodity boom came at considerable environmental cost. Resource 
consumption is well in excess of what is considered sustainable in the long term, increasing the 
risk of crossing dangerous tipping points.
26
 Global greenhouse gas emissions, principally from the 
consumption of fossil fuel resources, are tracking the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC)’s most pessimistic emissions pathway, consistent with a catastrophic warming level of 
3.7°C to 4.8°C by the end of the century.
27
 China accounted for more than half of the increase in 
global greenhouse gases over the last decade, during which time the pollution of soil, water and 
air resources has reached critical levels in the country.
28
Against this backdrop of cumulative environmental degradation, the new normal provides 
opportunities for reform. Lower resource prices can provide an opening for governments to remove 
resource subsidies, impose resource taxes and ‘price in’ environmental externalities, for example

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
3 
by putting a price on carbon. At the same time, reforms set out by the Central Committee of the 
Communist Party of China (CPC) have reaffirmed the concept of ecological civilization, introducing a 
raft of measures designed to improve the implementation of environmental laws and regulations.
29
China’s new growth model will reduce the environmental costs of economic development. China’s 
coal consumption fell for the first time in 14 years in 2014, in part due to a ramping up of government 
policies to tackle air pollution.
30
 The trend continued in 2015, with coal consumption expected to fall 
almost 5 per cent year-on-year, according to the China National Coal Association.
31
 Environmental 
benefits will follow, not only from slower growth but also from more sustainable growth as China 
moves up the value chain towards less resource-intensive economic activities and invests in greater 
efficiency, clean technologies and renewable energy.
1.3 Global resource governance
In parallel to the restructuring of its economy, China has become increasingly active in global 
governance since the financial crisis of 2008. For example, it has pushed for reform of the Bretton 
Woods institutions at the G20 and, with other emerging economies, established the New Development 
Bank (NDB). President Xi Jinping has said: ‘As China continues to develop, we will take on more 
and more international responsibilities in alignment with our national strength and status’.
32
 More 
generally, and perhaps unsurprisingly, given its import dependency, global resource governance 
(see Box 1) is a particular priority for China. President Xi has identified energy governance as a 
topic for the country’s presidency of the G20 in 2016.
Most markedly, China has founded a new multilateral development bank, the Asian Infrastructure 
Investment Bank (AIIB), ostensibly to facilitate an ambitious diplomatic and economic strategy to 
develop overland and maritime trade routes and infrastructure stretching from Europe and East 
Africa across the Asian continent. The initiative is itself part of the new normal, which in the words 
of President Xi will continue to ‘provide countries [with] more markets, growth, investment and 
cooperation opportunities’.
33 
Though not exclusively a resource strategy, the development of the 
‘New Silk Road Economic Belt’ – and related instruments such as the AIIB, the Silk Road Fund and 
the NDB – holds major implications for resource trade and natural capital.
34
 
Box 1: Defining global resource governance 
This report defines global resource governance as the collection of international narratives, norms, 
rules and organizations, formal or informal, that directly or indirectly influence the production, trade 
or consumption of natural resources.
 In the first instance, it includes arrangements in which sovereign governments are the central 
actors, from multilateral conventions and international organizations to regional groupings and 
bilateral partnerships. It also includes arrangements in which non-state actors play an important 
role, including global commodity exchanges, arbitration mechanisms, supply chain initiatives and 
other arrangements. More recently established institutions concerned with resource governance 
often consist of coalitions across a diverse set of stakeholders, including governments, businesses, 
international organizations, cities and civil society organizations. They all contribute to a relatively 
orderly and predictable international framework for the production and trade of resources.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
4 
1.4 A watershed moment for global governance
How China promotes the reform of global resource governance will have potentially profound 
implications for international relations. There is considerable debate among analysts and scholars 
about how China will seek to work within, reform or bypass existing international institutions 
and governance frameworks, and whether it will present a challenge to the existing world order 
– though, as John Ikenberry has noted, ‘China and the other emerging powers do not face simply 
an American-led order or a Western system. They face a broader international order that is the 
product of centuries of struggle and innovation.’
35
Of course, global governance is not confined to resources, and the dynamics underlying these concerns are 
sometimes even more complex than those surrounding resource and environmental security. At the heart 
of the questions are the increased expectations and inevitable geopolitical tensions created by a rising 
power. However, the issue of resource governance is something of a touchstone for these larger dynamics. 
Resources are often a lightning rod for wider geopolitical tensions, providing a subject of conflict, a 
source of leverage or an asset for statecraft. Resource governance cuts across the mandates of numerous 
international institutions and organizations on issues such as trade, investment and territorial claims.
For these reasons, China’s actions in the arena of global resource governance have wider 
significance and are not without risk. Yet the riskiest option for China would be to try to maintain the 
status quo, and to fail to prepare for new realities. The previous commodity boom exposed multiple 
gaps in global resource governance. While the current downturn in resource prices provides a window 
of opportunity to address these deficiencies, it may also lead to complacency among governments that 
are now distracted by higher priorities. 
When it comes to climate change, the present moment is more than just a political opportunity – it 
is the final chance. Avoiding dangerous climate change requires global emissions to peak and then 
rapidly decline within the next 10 to 15 years.
36
 Progress has been made: global coal use is thought 
to have fallen by up to 4.6 per cent year on year through the first nine months of 2015, driven by 
declining coal demand in the two largest consumers, China and the US.
37
 These two countries were 
instrumental in creating the conditions for a successful outcome in Paris climate negotiations in 
December 2015. Yet urgent action is still needed to avoid ‘locking in’ carbon-intensive resource use 
that will render climate goals unachievable. Post-Paris, China’s growing domestic and international 
leadership on climate change can provide a platform for inspiring and assisting other emerging and 
developing countries in achieving sustainable development.
1.5 About this report
China’s new normal presents challenges for some actors – notably resource producers – and it has 
inevitably raised concerns and uncertainty in many quarters. But it also presents opportunities, for 
China and the world. The key questions are how China will make the transition to slower but more 
sustainable growth, how China will contribute to the reform of global resource governance, and how 
the rest of the world will respond to these shifts. 
This report considers these questions. It argues that China’s interests align closely with the provision 
of global goods in a number of key areas of resource governance. In each of these, it sets out specific 
reforms for China to pursue in the common interest and considers the reciprocal actions needed from 
the international community for these opportunities to be realized.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
5 
2. Key concerns for China in the 
new normal 
China is currently in a period of structural transition. Slower growth has emerged, imports of resources 
and exports of manufactured goods have fallen, and China’s resource investment has slowed. Recent 
changes in China’s economy – most notably the dramatic declines seen on the Shanghai stock market 
and in the country’s manufacturing index – have raised widespread concerns about China’s economic 
stability in this transition period.
38
 
The jury is still out on whether China can manage a steady transition to a stable new normal. It will have 
to overcome several challenges before it can be said with certainty that its new normal is characterized 
by slower, higher-quality growth. This means developing a sustainable, low-carbon economic trajectory 
at home, but it also entails balancing domestic and international needs in a world of complex resource 
and economic interdependencies. 
This section examines some of the key concerns that will inform China’s choices in domestic policy 
formation and international engagement. 
2.1 Understanding China’s new normal and resources
2.1.1 A key moment in China’s development 
China has entered a new phase of economic development. Its economy grew by 7 .4 per cent in 2014, the 
slowest rate for two decades, and is likely to have grown even more slowly in 2015.
39
 China’s growth could 
not have continued at 10 per cent forever and the more remarkable thing is that it continued at such a 
rate for so long. The 12th Five-Year Plan (2011–15) foresaw this change, setting a GDP growth target of 7 
per cent. Nonetheless, the onset of slower growth has brought a range of important issues to the fore.
The hope in China is that slower growth provides opportunities to tackle environmental challenges 
including air pollution, water scarcity and land degradation, and to shift to a greener growth model.
40
 
The government is investing $277 billion in its air quality action plan,
41
 and Beijing’s pollution levels 
improved in 2014 for the first time since records began.
42
 After many years of rapid growth, China’s 
coal demand is approaching or may have already reached a structural peak.
43
 The country’s leaders 
have announced that greenhouse gas emissions will peak as soon as possible before 2030.
44
 Some of 
the pressure on water and land resources will also be alleviated by these changes; the coal sector, for 
example, is a very large user of water.
45
In the short term, these changes pose significant challenges for China due to their impact on heavy 
industries and resource production. Heavy industries such as steel, cement and power generation, 
which have been the motors of growth in the past, have been slowing down. Lack of demand for raw 
materials in these sectors combined with lower commodity prices has hit China’s resource producers 
hard (see Box 2), with significant socio economic impacts in parts of the country. Coal, for example,

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
6 
employs 6 million people and 70 per cent of firms in the sector made losses in the first half of 2015.
46
 The 
oil and gas industry is also facing challenges; new chairs have been appointed at the China Petroleum 
& Chemical Corporation (Sinopec), China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) and China National 
Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) this year after these state-owned companies experienced lower 
returns than the private sector.
47
Box 2: China’s energy new normal
Transition to the new normal is placing new pressures on China’s mining industries. Miners are 
facing downward pressure following the downturn in international commodity prices. While the price 
of primary bulk commodities has been falling, production costs are continuing to increase, with the 
result that the value of companies is falling. The global picture also looks challenging, with the cyclical 
downtrend of the industry compounded by rising costs and slowing finance. Yet at the same time, 
innovation has the potential to enhance the competitiveness of China’s resource industries, as do 
factors such as the acquisition of resources at relatively lower cost, faster capitalization on domestic 
mining rights and technological gains, including improved processes and updated equipment.
The ‘golden years’ of China’s coal industry have passed and coal companies will have to change 
their development strategy and actively adapt to the new normal market. Economic dependence 
on coal is gradually diminishing as economic growth slows and China’s economic structure is 
optimized. Decelerating growth in thermal power generation has reduced coal demand, resulting in an 
oversupplied buyers’ market with no more seasonal peak procurements. The domestic coal market also 
experienced shocks from rising imports. The price paid for domestic coal has fallen sharply, dramatically 
reducing the profitability of firms – data from the National Development and Reform Commission 
(NDRC) suggests that more than 70 per cent of miners experienced losses in the first half of 2015.
48
 
Figure 2: China’s total energy consumption, by source (1990 to 2023) 
1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008 
2011 
2014
0 
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
Oil
2017
2020
2023
GasNon-fossil energy Coal
Million tonnes of coal equivalent
Source: DRC; historical data from the National Bureau of Statistics (2013).

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
7 
However, the new normal does not mean that the development of all segments in the energy 
industry will slow. For China’s energy development, it means a decrease in energy consumption 
growth, an increase in clean energy and non-fossil fuel energy consumption, and the promotion of an 
energy revolution. Natural gas demand, for example, will continue to grow rapidly due to the current 
low base of consumption in China, and the demands of industrialization, urbanization and the rise of 
the service industries (see Figure 2). China is also the world’s largest investor in renewable energy and 
has rapidly increased the scale of this investment – by 39 per cent between 2013 and 2014 to more 
than $80 billion.
49
 
Resource production has long been a fundamental industry that underpins economic 
development in China. Managing the cross-cutting implications of transition to the energy new 
normal remains a key challenge. Changes in the energy mix can have complex knock-on effects; for 
example, the coal sector accounts for a significant share of diesel used in the transportation sector.
50
 
Declining coal consumption will reduce diesel demand – after over a decade of growth, diesel 
demand slowed in 201 1 and began falling in 2013.
51
 At the same time, managing the underlying 
political economy of resource production at the subnational level will present cross-cutting economic 
and social challenges, particularly in major northern and western coal-producing regions. 
These challenges increase the urgency of ongoing domestic structural reforms designed to reduce 
risks and create the conditions for long-term, higher-quality growth. Policy-makers are trying to 
reduce excessive lending in parts of the economy in order to lower the risk of a future financial crisis 
and to alleviate over-capacity in the heavy industries.
52
 New measures have been introduced to punish 
polluters and to incentivize officials to prioritize environmental performance.
53
 Anti-corruption efforts 
could also help to ensure a growing role for the private sector by ensuring more efficient allocation of 
resources and by attracting high-quality investment.
54
 
Already, China’s growth is coming from new economic areas that are less resource-intensive. The 
services sector now accounts for almost half of GDP and helped to ensure that more than 10 million 
jobs were created in 2014.
55
 The seven priority industries in the 12th Five-Year Plan have been growing 
fast, including clean energy and environmental protection. China is installing and investing more in 
renewable energy than any other country.
56
 Enhanced efficiency measures also provide important 
economic and other benefits. The IEA estimates that in general, large-scale energy efficiency policies 
can stimulate economic growth by 0.25–1.1 per cent per year.
57
 
Industry still accounts for around half of final energy demand, much of it provided by coal.
58
 
Furthermore, with income levels rising domestic energy use will continue to increase over the next 
decade. While China’s energy mix will evolve under the new normal (see Box 2), its future total 
energy use will continue to see substantial growth.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
8 
Even with relatively slower, higher-quality growth, China will remain one of the largest resource 
consumers in the world. Today, it uses three times more energy
59
 than it did in 2000, and it is the 
largest consumer of 12 out of 14 major commodities.
60
 Furthermore, China’s use of some resources 
will need to increase in order to support a greener economy – copper for communications and gold 
for electronics, for example. With 100 million additional people moving into cities by 2020
61
 and 
a growing middle class, there will be growing water use and pressure on land. While efficiency 
savings can do much to alleviate resource-related stresses, the country will remain a user of 
natural resources on a huge scale.
2.1.2 An increasingly complex overseas situation
China’s economic transition will continue to depend in part on overseas suppliers of resources. Its 
extractive sector is one of the largest in the world, but it has not been able to keep pace with surging 
domestic demand in the past decade. This trend will continue. According to analysis by the DRC, 
China may depend on imports for 39 out of 45 mineral types by 2020.
62
 The share of oil imports could 
reach 70 per cent in 2020.
63
 
Chinese officials face the diplomatic and practical challenge of managing relations with an ever-
growing list of resource partners. Today, 18 major resource partners account for over 70 per cent 
of China’s imports.
64 
The largest share of resource flows comes from China’s Asian neighbours, but 
countries in Latin America, Oceania and Africa are also key (see Box 3). This web of relationships 
cannot easily be managed through bilateral ties alone. China, perhaps more than any other country, 
depends on open international markets, rules-based resource trade and supply security. 
Despite slowing resource investment, such challenges will persist. The flip side of China’s 
dependence on global markets is that resource-rich producer countries are increasingly dependent 
on Chinese demand to maintain their export revenues and economic plans, and are now facing 
tough choices as their resource revenues fall. Many will still look to the know-how and investment 
of Chinese companies and financial institutions to develop their natural resource industries. 
For Chinese firms and their foreign investments the new normal means moving up the value chain 
towards non-extractive, higher value-added activities. This presents opportunities for cooperation 
on technology and new business models, and to expand markets for resource-efficient technologies. 
China is continuing to pursue progress on energy efficiency, price reform and other issues, as well 
as its circular economy strategy. Overseas, it may become key in helping other developing countries 
along the resource productivity curve.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
9 
Box 3: China and global resource interdependencies 
The concentration of resources among suppliers is a key resource security concern for China. Just 
18 exporters – each exporting more than $10 billion worth of natural resources to China per year – 
account for over 70 per cent of China’s total resource imports. Four are China’s neighbours (Russia, 
Japan, South Korea and Indonesia), five are Middle Eastern oil exporters (Saudi Arabia, Iran, Oman, 
Iraq and the United Arab Emirates), three are South American (Brazil, Chile and Venezuela), two are 
African (Angola and South Africa), and four are advanced economies that are either resource-rich 
(Australia, the US and Canada) or processing centres (the EU). Across six critical import streams – 
crude oil, iron ore, coal, gas and liquefied natural gas (LNG), copper and potash – the four largest 
suppliers provide between almost half and four-fifths of China’s imports. 
Figure 3: China’s resource interdependencies 
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, COMTRADE (2015). 
In terms of regional interdependencies, China’s trading partners in Asia and the Caucasus (including 
Russia) account for over 20 per cent of resource imports in value terms. However, their relative 
importance has been declining and five overseas regions now account for around 65 per cent of 
China’s total resource imports by value (see Figure 4).
Resource ﬂows equal to or greater than $1 billion in 2014, equalling 98.3% of all resource ﬂows into China
Fossil fuels Fertilizers
Metals and ores Agriculture and forestry
100bn
USD
Value
Scale
10bn
USD
1bn
USD
1
2
3
4
5
6
9
8
10 7
11
1. MENA
2. South America
3. Oceania
4. Sub-Saharan Africa
5. North America
6. South East Asia
7 . East Asia
8. Central and Northern Asia
9. Europe
10. South Asia
1 1. Caribbean and Central America

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
10 
• The Middle East and North Africa (20 per cent) region supplies roughly one-third of the oil that 
China consumes. However, conflicts in exporting countries such as Libya and Iraq have brought 
disruption to oil flows and demonstrated the limits of China’s response options.
• South America (14 per cent) is the fastest-growing export region to China and resource trade 
between the two is underpinned by increasing political ties, although concerns have been 
raised over the environmental and social standards of Chinese investors, especially in the 
mining sector. 
• In the Oceania region (13 per cent) Australia is China’s biggest resource supplier and China is 
Australia’s biggest trading partner, with trade dominated by iron ore and coal. Despite strong trade 
ties, bilateral relations have become strained around resource acquisitions. 
• Sub-Saharan Africa (10 per cent) has emerged as a fast-growing although still relatively small 
resource supplier to China. The lion’s share of exports from the region consists of crude oil from 
Angola, Sudan and South Sudan, as well as metals from South Africa, Guinea and others. 
• Resource exports from North America (8 per cent) include commodities such as soybeans and 
significant quantities of metals, and may expand to include fossil fuels if the shale gas revolution 
can be sustained and regulatory and infrastructure barriers can be resolved. 
Figure 4: China’s imports of natural resources by region of origin, 2000–14, billion USD
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 
USD (billion) 
Caribbean and Central America 
South Asia 
Europe 
China 
South East Asia 
Central and Northern Asia 
North America 
East Asia 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Oceania 
South America 
MENA 
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE (2015).
Note: Data for mainland China; imports from China region denote intraregional flows from Hong Kong and Macau.
See Annex for data and analysis on China’s resource interdependencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
11 
2.1.3 A new international context
While a prolonged period of lower oil prices looks likely, many of the underlying drivers of volatility 
remain. The boom in unconventional oil and gas production in North America and OPEC’s decision 
to yield to market forces are game-changers and have fundamentally altered the operation of global 
oil markets. At the same time, however, there has been a wider shift in the consumption and trade in 
fossil fuels from developed to emerging economies, which are struggling in the downturn. Growing 
disparities between prices for producers (e.g. the fuel cost) and prices for consumers (including fuel 
taxes etc.) are also raising the prospect of permanent destruction of demand.
The collapse in global oil prices has exacerbated downward pressure on metals and minerals markets. 
Commodity prices were already in decline from 2014.
65
 In heavily concentrated markets such as iron 
ore, cheap energy has reduced the cost of production and transport, enabling major miners to ramp 
up production in an attempt to maintain market share. According to the investment bank UBS, the 
break-even costs of the largest exporters of seaborne iron ore – Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton – are three-
quarters of those of the next largest Australian iron producers, and around half the break-even cost 
for China’s domestic production.
66
 Both shipped record volumes of iron ore in 2014 and increased their 
share of China’s iron ore imports by almost 15 per cent in 2014.
67
 Elsewhere, for example in copper and 
zinc markets, producers have opted to cut production with the aim of stimulating a price recovery.
68
 
Major mining companies have suffered serious commercial loss despite selling their less productive 
assets and cutting costs and capital expenditure. Rio Tinto, BHP Billiton and Vale, for example, have 
lost between one-third and two-thirds of their share price over the course of 2015.
69
 Some of China’s 
flagship overseas investments, such as CNPC’s $5 billion stake in the Kashagan oil project in the Caspian 
Sea and CITIC Pacific Mining’s $10 billion Sino Iron project in Australia, are among the most exposed – 
due to their sheer scale, among other commercial factors.
70
 
Resource-producing countries are also struggling to respond to the direct and indirect impacts of 
a slowdown in China. The list of countries with reduced economic growth in 2014 included Brazil, 
Chile, Peru and Russia. Others, such as Venezuela and Iraq, have entered negative growth.
71
 Resource 
exporters are affected due to their dependence on Chinese imports, but also due to falls in commodity 
markets, which are partly due to the slowdown in China (see Box 4). The World Bank has argued 
that China’s situation represents a ‘permanent external change that calls for new responses’ in 
producer countries.
72
Oil companies are being forced to seek new business models. High-cost and high-risk investment 
in fossil fuel supply has been constrained by uncertainty around oil prices, the changing financial 
environment and the expectation of stronger climate change policies. In the long term, action on 
climate change and technological advances will depress global demand for fossil fuels, raising 
concerns that some extractive industries and other investments could be ‘stranded’.
73
 
Tackling resource challenges and ensuring sufficient and sustainable investment are a key part 
of accelerating action on climate change. In the run-up to the Paris Climate Change Conference, the 
spotlight was on coal. With experts warning that two-thirds of existing reserves will need to be kept in 
the ground, there is growing pressure on institutions like the World Bank not to support investments in 
coal, the most greenhouse gas-intensive fossil fuel.
74
 The US and China have implemented measures to 
further curb coal consumption, including controls on the number of energy-intensive projects in polluted 
regions.
75
 Many cities and companies have also signed up to ambitious targets to reduce emissions.
76

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
12 
Box 4: Critical interdependencies in a lower commodity price scenario
Across resource markets, complex interdependencies have been brought to life in new ways as 
commodity prices have collapsed, with shifting impacts upon China, its resource partners, and in 
wider global economic and industrial markets. Nonetheless, many of the results of these impacts, 
from volatility in global resource markets to tensions between resource producers and consumers, 
are familiar. 
China’s slowing demand for raw materials has had knock-on implications for global financial 
stability. Stock market volatility in mid-2015 illustrated the risks of market contagion. Plunging 
technology stocks were quickly followed by commodity prices,
77
 as macroeconomic confidence 
faltered over slowing Chinese demand. Copper demand is seen as particularly indicative of 
Chinese economic activity due to its wide application in industrial and manufacturing processes, 
which have been the engine of China’s economic growth. Despite falling global prices, the growth 
in Chinese imports of copper and other commodities slowed by 3.6 per cent between January and 
October 2015 compared with the same period in 2014.
78 
The dominant perception is that continued flat 
demand will mean continued volatility in Chinese and global financial markets.
79
 
For countries whose trade links to China are concentrated in the extractives sector, these 
macroeconomic trends have led to marked impacts. Collapsing commodity prices have resulted in 
a significant decline in the Australian trade surplus with China,
80
 with implications for the Australian 
dollar, which has depreciated by almost 40 per cent since 201 1.
81 
Other, less developed economies are 
even more exposed. Zambia is China’s second-largest copper supplier and relies on copper exports 
for roughly 70 per cent of foreign exchange earnings and 25–30 per cent of government revenues; 
and its currency has collapsed by 30 per cent since the beginning of 2015.
82
 The silver lining for some 
major mining economies, perhaps, is that the depreciation of their currencies has lowered production 
costs where commodities, such as iron ore and copper, are priced in US dollars. 
At the same time, collapsing global commodity prices have had profound implications for resource-
linked industries in China. Competitive pressure has increased as a result of declining global prices, 
prompting fiscal intervention by the government. With up to three-quarters of iron ore miners 
operating at a loss, a 60 per cent decrease in the rate of the resource tax imposed upon domestic 
producers was announced in early 2015.
83 
The devaluation of the renminbi may also help domestic 
coal, iron ore and aluminium production by making domestic production comparatively more 
attractive than imports.
84 
However, structural difficulties as a result of excess capacity will remain, 
with the steel, iron and coal industries facing slumping demand and profits, as well as increasingly 
struggling to service their debts.
85 
2.2 Key challenges for China 
As the previous section describes, there is little doubt that China has entered a new period of economic 
development. The key question is how it can successfully make the shift to slower but higher-quality 
growth. Given China’s situation and role in the world, this is as much an international issue as a 
domestic one. It will be important for Chinese policy-makers to develop a clear understanding of the

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
13 
international pressures and challenges in the ‘resources space’ that could affect China’s progress towards 
an ecological civilization. These can arise anywhere in the resources system – from shocks to production 
to a disruption in trade, or through the impact of price volatility. The rest of this section highlights key 
concerns for China in this context.
2.2.1 Ensuring global trade and markets work
During the resources boom, perceptions of scarcity contributed to increasing tensions over markets. 
Major resource-consuming nations took political, diplomatic or even military steps towards ensuring 
a long-term, stable, secure and affordable supply of energy and resources. For emerging economies 
such as India and China, securing sufficient energy and resources for economic development has been 
a diplomatic priority. Meanwhile, the shale gas revolution has provided the US with new-found energy 
independence and a growing range of strategic options. 
Throughout the boom, there were fears among consumer countries that the small number of 
governments and companies that control key reserves and the supply of certain important energy and 
mineral resources could apply protectionist measures. Resource producers put up barriers to market 
entry and restrictions on exports, leveraging their position to increase economic returns. ‘Resource 
nationalism’ re-emerged as a concern for state-backed and private investors alike, frequently topping 
lists of investment risk.
86
 In cases such as Indonesian nickel and Indian iron ore, these have had a 
significant economic impact on China. Equally, China came under international pressure due to the 
quotas it introduced on the export of rare earth elements. 
The prolonged period of high and volatile prices led to growing concerns about the potential for 
excessive speculation, especially in energy and food commodities – although this remains highly 
controversial. According to figures from the Bank for International Settlements, in 2005 the total 
volumes of oil and copper futures traded on exchanges were the equivalent of 3.9 times and 36.1 
times global production respectively.
87
 Throughout the boom, investors increasingly took positions 
in commodity markets in order to diversify their portfolios and gain from rising commodity prices, 
resulting in a substantial capital influx into derivative markets for natural resources, although 
opinions diverge on the extent to which these kinds of market activity exacerbate price volatility.
88
 
The strength of the financial sector in many major consumer nations contributed to this 
financialization of mineral resources and commodity metals, tightening the linkages between financial 
markets and global metals prices. Financial sector involvement in energy and resource markets 
– including in oil and gas trading, the use of derivative products and commodity price-discovery 
mechanisms, among others – has come under increasing scrutiny from regulators, in the US and 
the UK in particular.
89
 These are areas where China’s influence has been relatively limited, due to 
the slow development of a Chinese futures market, the low use of the renminbi internationally, and 
the existence of numerous small resource firms that act individually on international markets. 
2.2.2 Maintaining the security of resource flows
Security of overseas supply and transportation is of paramount importance to China, as it is for other 
major resource importers including Japan, South Korea and the EU. While the pace of China’s resource 
import growth has slowed and there are declines in some areas such as coal and iron ore, its import 
dependency is still expected to grow for many resources in the medium to long term. China’s oil

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
14 
consumption, for example, stood at around 445 million tonnes in 2010,
90
 and is expected to reach 600 
million tonnes by 2020 and pass 800 million tonnes by 2030, of which 75 per cent would be imported.
91
 
This raises the importance of secure sea lanes, resource corridors and pipelines, as well as confidence in 
trade and investment frameworks with producers and transit nations. Supply chains can be interrupted 
at different points – at the extraction, transportation or refining stages – and for a variety of reasons. 
Conflict and criminal activity including piracy have affected some of the key shipping routes to China. 
Even relatively safe land and pipeline routes are often at risk from military conflict or natural disasters. 
Meanwhile, there are concerns that major resource suppliers or traders could use their market position 
to increase transportation costs and import prices, for political reasons as well as for economic ones. For 
other countries, these risks are compounded by a lack of transportation routes to China.
92
Many strategic shipping lanes lie beyond China’s influence or, indeed, that of any single actor on the global 
stage. Shipping channels, particularly those suitable for supertankers, such as the Strait of Hormuz, the 
Malacca Strait and the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait, are extremely congested. The Malacca Strait is Asia’s most 
important shipping lane for energy, with around 11 million barrels of oil transiting through it per day, 
including 70 per cent of China’s seaborne oil imports in 2014. It also carries significant volumes of iron ore 
(28 per cent) and copper (21 per cent). The Bab-el-Mandeb Strait and the now widened Suez Canal are 
also import routes for the energy and metals trade with China. Figure 5 shows the estimated proportion of 
Chinese imports of selected commodities that passed through different maritime chokepoints. 
The security of shipping routes, alongside international terrorism and other threats, is seen by China 
as a major risk to its imports of strategic resources. The Malacca Strait sees more accidents than 
any other shipping channel – three times as many as the Suez Canal, and four times as many as the 
Panama Canal – and experiences 60 per cent of all pirate attacks. 
Figure 5: China’s key resource imports by % passing through key maritime chokepoints
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Malacca Strait 
Bab-el-Mandeb
Strait
Strait of
Hormuz
Suez
Canal
Turkish
Straits
Strait of
Gibraltar
Cape of
Good Hope 
Panama
Canal
Coal Crude oil Iron ore Copper Nickel 
%
 200 
 400 
 600 
 800 
 1,000 Million tonnes 
Total import weight (2014) 
0
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN Comtrade (2015); preliminary estimates from Chatham House analysis of 
maritime chokepoints. 
Note: some imported resources pass through multiple chokepoints before arriving in China; hence the sum across chokepoints 
can amount to more than 100 per cent.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
15 
Moreover, maritime and resource corridor security presents complex risks for imports and exports. 
The traditional distinctions between resource producers and consumers are eroding.
93
 The Gulf States, 
for example, are dependent on the Strait of Hormuz for their food imports. Countries in Asia depend 
on part-processed resources from China. Meanwhile, all of China’s export partners depend on stable 
trade flows with China to a significant extent.
2.2.3 The political and commercial risks of resource investments
Chinese firms continue to face an uphill struggle when it comes to overseas investments in 
resource production. At a commercial level, projects have incurred heavy losses. A 2010 report from 
the China University of Petroleum found that the three major Chinese oil companies, CNPC, Sinopec 
and CNOOC, had seen losses in two-thirds of their overseas projects; such losses have fed broader 
criticism regarding commercial management and decision-making among China’s state-owned 
enterprises (SOEs).
94
 Similarly, some Chinese officials have questioned the performance of mining 
sector acquisitions.
95
As prices have fallen, some of China’s flagship acquisitions and projects look increasingly costly. 
Chinese companies typically paid one-fifth more for oil and gas assets than the industry average.
96
 
CNOOC’s purchase of Nexen, a Canadian firm with assets in Canada’s oil sands and the Gulf of 
Mexico, at the height of the market in 2013 was the most expensive of China’s overseas acquisitions 
– at $15 billion.
97
 The Kashagan oil project in the Caspian Sea, in which CNPC has a $5 billion stake, 
is one of the most expensive oil and gas projects in the world, while CITIC Pacific Mining’s $10 billion 
Sino Iron project in Australia has been described as the ‘most expensive mine in the world’.
98
 
China’s investments have traditionally been concentrated in economic sectors where environmental 
impacts are critical, such as energy, mining and forestry.
99
 Chinese actors have come under increasing 
pressure due to alleged poor environmental practices – for instance in Chad for oil production and in 
Ghana for informal gold mining.
100
 Chinese companies have perhaps faced more criticism than those 
from other countries, though some experts have argued that they are no worse than some firms from 
developed countries.
101
 Across the board, the growth of new technologies and social media suggests 
the levels of scrutiny that resource development faces will only increase in future.
Overseas acquisitions by Chinese resource companies have also at times been hindered by 
political factors. Two well-known examples are the failed bids by CNOOC for Unocal Petroleum (now 
Chevron) in 2005 and Chinalco’s attempted merger with Rio Tinto in 2009.
102
 Some countries regard 
international market acquisitions of oil, gas or mineral resources by Chinese energy or resource firms 
as government actions impacting on their political and regional interests – theories sometimes called 
a ‘China resource threat’ and ‘China energy threat’.
103
 It remains to be seen if this will continue in a 
period of lower prices, or if producer countries will be more open to Chinese investment.
During the resources boom, Chinese firms shifted their investment focus from developed countries 
such as Canada and Australia to developing ones in Africa and Latin America. But due to the unstable 
environment for the mining industry in developing countries and the companies’ lack of investment 
experience, the number of successful investments has been limited.
International media and policy-makers have frequently interpreted Chinese extractive investments as 
attempts to ‘lock up’ resources for China’s fast-growing industries. But other motives, including the 
diversification of the country’s large savings and investment portfolios, the development of technical

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
16 
and managerial expertise in extractives industries, and the acquisition of high-yielding assets, 
are important parts of the story.
104
 
Chinese overseas investment has now shifted focus, with less emphasis on resource extraction and 
infrastructure, and more on technology, food, real estate and services. Energy and mining deals have 
declined from 60 per cent of China’s outbound merger and acquisition activity in 2010 to 16 per cent 
in 2014.
105
 As KPMG has noted, only one of the top 10 outbound merger and acquisition deals was 
in the mining sector in 2015 – the Xstrata Las Bambas deal in Peru – compared with five years ago, 
when there were six oil and gas deals and one mining deal.
106
 The trend towards higher value-added 
projects is likely to continue in the new normal.
Large-scale investment is also no longer the exclusive domain of the major state-owned enterprises. 
According to the Wall Street Journal, ‘more than $50 billion in Chinese investment found its way into 
the US shale oil boom, and less than 20 per cent of that came from the big three [Chinese NOCs – 
CNPC, Sinopec and CNOOC]. About $40 billion came from private Chinese capital or state-owned 
companies that were not in the oil industry before’.
107
2.2.4 Pressure on the global resources system
Climate change causes growing concern for the stability of the global resources system. Extreme weather 
events are becoming more frequent,
108 
and unsustainable patterns of resource use have already transgressed 
a number of ‘planetary boundaries’.
109 
Jim Yong Kim, the head of the World Bank, has stated that ‘climate 
change is one of the single biggest challenges facing development’.
110 
China’s leaders have also stressed 
the link between climate change and development, stating that ‘global climate change has a profound 
impact on the existence and development of mankind and is a major challenge facing all countries’.
111 
The different resource industries that have underpinned China’s and the world’s development clearly 
have different characteristics and will continue to demand sector-specific solutions. The characteristics 
and governance priorities vary considerably across different fossil fuels, and even more so when 
comparing fuels with other types of mineral resources. At the same time, however, there are important 
reasons why policy-makers and investors are increasingly complementing sector-specific approaches 
with a broader ‘resources’ perspective. 
Resource systems are closely interlinked at the local and global level through markets, trade and the 
environment. Global resource trade has more than tripled between 2000 and 2010 from less than $1.5 
trillion to nearly $5 trillion.
112
 IMF data suggest a broad correlation in prices across agricultural products, 
fuels and metals when presented as an annual average.
113
 McKinsey suggests that this correlation has 
strengthened over the last century, reflecting tighter linkages between resource markets.
114
 
The availability and the price of one resource also have knock-on effects on the production of others. 
The energy sector, for example, is a significant user of water; in 2005 mining, transport, processing 
and energy transformation accounted for about 35 per cent of water use in the industrial sector 
globally.
115
 Global water withdrawals for energy production alone were estimated at 583 billion cubic 
metres, or 15 per cent of the world’s total water withdrawals in 2010.
116
 Under the IEA’s New Policies 
Scenario, China’s water consumption in the energy sector will rise by more than 50 per cent between 
2010 and 2020.
117 
Land resources are also under pressure, with cropland lost to urbanization and 
industrial use, or converted for biofuel production and reforestation.
118

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
17 
As resources markets have grown, so too have the dependencies on the shipping lanes, major 
port facilities and transport infrastructures that support resource trade. Some of these infrastructures 
are highly resource-specific but they are often geographically connected. A disruption in the Strait 
of Hormuz, for example, would have significant impacts on food distribution in the Middle East as 
well as better-known implications for oil markets. Similarly, a drought or flood in a major resource-
producing country such as the US or Australia could affect multiple resources at once. Australia was 
hit by floods in December 2010 that destroyed an estimated $1.6 billion worth of crops and led to a 
15 million tonne drop in coal exports between December 2010 and January 2011.
119
The interconnectedness of resource systems means that it is critical to explore unintended 
consequences when considering regulatory choices in domestic markets (such as biofuels subsidies, 
export controls or production subsidies) or supporting the development and deployment of new 
technologies. Many efforts have been made to analyse these interconnections, placing energy, 
food and/or water at the centre of a resource ‘nexus’. Some have advocated integrated resource 
management and governance across sectors and scale, while others have proposed cross-cutting 
targets for lowering resource use.
120
Assessing risks and opportunities across natural resources can also unlock transformative policy 
options or political outcomes. Efforts to transition to a ‘circular economy’ – where industry, agriculture 
and services are rewired along ecological lines, ensuring that waste from one becomes a useful 
resource for another – will depend on policy frameworks that encourage integrated thinking across 
energy and materials use, waste and other policy areas, including market-based instruments such as 
carbon trading. Analysis of patent ownership in low-carbon energy sectors also shows that innovation 
has tended to occur across sector silos and in different countries, so encouraging knowledge and 
technology transfers between sectors will help to facilitate new solutions.
121
As a major consumer, China will – through its choices – play a major role in determining the success 
of global action on climate change. A further scaling-up of global resource production will be required 
over the next decade, despite the pressures that are already arising from associated environmental 
impacts, in order to meet demand from China and other emerging economies such as India. Resource 
efficiency plays a vital, if understated, role in improving resource security and reducing these 
pressures. Had China not implemented efficiency savings over the past decade, for example, the 
impacts and risks seen in resources markets would have been even more dramatic.
122
 
2.2.5 Inflexible international mechanisms 
The sense that China is on the outside of key decision-making processes that will determine its future 
risk exposure is in itself a key concern. Despite its central importance in natural resources production, 
investment and trade, it has played a limited role in international processes and mechanisms 
designed to manage global resource challenges, in areas such as supply security, market rules and risk 
management frameworks. Chinese officials have highlighted the necessity of restructuring the current 
global resource governance system to avoid vulnerabilities in mineral supplies and enable the scaling-
up of production.
123

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
18 
As described in the next section, many organizations were established in a previous era and have 
struggled to adapt to a fast-changing world in which China and other new actors are seeking a 
growing role. In some cases, a lack of experience or capacity, or reluctance on the part of Chinese 
authorities and enterprises, may have contributed. In other cases, it may be because other 
countries are sceptical about China taking a growing role.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
19 
3. The evolution of global resource 
governance 
The choices China makes at home and abroad will to a large extent determine the risks and 
opportunities it faces in the coming years. China will manage its existing resource and environmental 
security challenges alongside emerging ones, such as building an innovation-led economy and 
managing disruptive change. How these choices play out will depend in part on the quality of 
China’s international engagement and on how international partners respond.
In many ways, China’s interests in resource governance are closely aligned with those of the rest of 
the world. What would success look like? The key goals include reducing pressure on international 
resource markets; alleviating the environmental and social impacts associated with today’s resource 
production and consumption patterns; and breaking the deadlock in addressing climate change, as 
well as the management of other global public goods, including vulnerable ecosystems, oceans and 
even space. 
The complex landscape of global resource governance (see Section 1) emerged in response to the 
shifting resource interdependencies and market shocks of previous eras. This messy web of international 
norms, institutions and mechanisms reflects the needs and priorities of key governments, businesses 
and other actors of the day – along with their interests and influence. This section maps out how the 
governance landscape has developed since 1944 and what political, trade and other barriers stand in 
the way of effective reform and innovation.
3.1 The four phases of global resource governance 
3.1.1 The Bretton Woods era and stable commodities prices 1944–72
The establishment of the Bretton Woods institutions and a period of relatively stable commodity prices 
following the Second World War provided the foundations for global resource governance. Governments 
were focused on post-war reconstruction and establishing processes that would facilitate trade and 
investment, partially in order to avoid an escalation in protectionism and increased tensions between 
major economies. Many of the norms and rules that underpin international trade, investment and the 
maritime commons were established by governments and Bretton Woods institutions between 1944 
and 1960, although some were formalized in later decades.
Industrialized OECD countries dominated trade and production outside communist countries, and 
heavily influenced early global resource governance arrangements. Developing countries’ growing 
influence was channelled through the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the G77 , established at 
the first UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in 1964. China’s engagement with 
the Bretton Woods institutions and their main counterweight, the NAM, was relatively limited 
during this period, and it remained on the outskirts of the G77 .

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
20 
China’s period of relative exclusion came to an end in 1971, when the UN restored PR China’s lawful 
rights. At this point China took up its seat on the Security Council, joined UNCTAD and was elected 
to the UN Seabed Committee. In 1972, China sent a delegation to the UN Conference on the Human 
Environment in Stockholm (UNCHE), which had direct impact on China’s environmental governance, 
leading to the establishment of environmental institutions and laws, and the first national conference 
on environmental protection in 1973.
124
 At the multilateral level, however, environmental issues were 
rarely on the agenda outside the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). 
3.1.2 From oil shocks and instability to globalization redux 1973–88 
Events in the early 1970s reframed political debates around resources markets. Throughout the 
previous era, low and stable prices had facilitated attempts to manage prices via UN commodity 
agreements and producer groups, including OPEC. The first oil shock in 1973 led to the creation of 
the IEA in order to counterbalance OPEC and safeguard the interests of oil consumer countries. As a 
net crude oil exporter, China was not impacted heavily by the oil shocks and instead capitalized on the 
crisis, exporting oil to Thailand, the Philippines and other Asian countries.
125
 Meanwhile, the major 
commodity agreements all collapsed, casting doubt on the ability of governments to control global 
commodity prices.
126
 Many governments began to pursue liberalization, opening up to investment 
and trade. 
Long-running negotiations eventually led to important breakthroughs on trade, investment and 
the law of the sea. The G77 had increasing influence in negotiations over the law of the sea, rules 
governing the seabed and changes to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to allow 
preferential trade arrangements for poorer countries. China joined the 3rd UN Conference on the 
Law of the Sea in 1973,
127 
which it saw as a rallying point for the developing world’s fight against the 
‘maritime hegemony’ of the West.
128
 Rule-making on waste, shipping and mining began to increase, 
but there remained limited activity on global environmental change, despite the publication of The 
Limits to Growth.
129
 
In the late 1970s, China initiated economic expansion and increased its presence in international 
trade. At the same time, China started ‘opening up’, and began lobbying for IMF and World Bank 
membership, which were granted in 1980.
3.1.3 Decline of the Washington Consensus and mainstreaming of sustainable 
development 1989–2007
The end of the Cold War paved the way for the creation of the WTO in 1995, furthering the process of 
globalization. The Asian Tigers become a new source of resource demand, but the financial crises in 
Asia and Russia in 1997–98 began to raise doubts over the Washington Consensus prescriptions. China 
received US support for its application for WTO membership in 1999
130 
and joined the organization 
two years later, after agreeing to an unprecedented list of accession obligations.
131
 The costs to China 
of accession were justified by the benefits of deeper integration into the global economy and the 
increased momentum this lent to domestic economic reforms. The UN Convention on the Law of the 
Sea (UNCLOS) also came into force, and was ratified by China in 1996,
132
 although the US remained 
outside the treaty due to unresolved concerns about deep-sea mining, among other issues.
133

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
21 
Concerns over the impact of climate change and environmental stresses on resource security also 
increased in prominence. The Rio Summit in 1992 marked the high point of multilateral cooperation. 
Following Rio, sustainable development entered the lexicon of Chinese legislation and began to be 
reflected in high-level narratives for the first time, with sustainable development confirmed as a 
national development strategy in the 9th Five-Year Plan (1996–2000), and the ‘huge environmental 
and resource pressures caused by population growth and economic development’ cited as a major 
challenge at the 15th Party Congress in 1997 .
134
 
At the same time, however, divisions at the international level were becoming more prominent. At 
Rio, China sided with developing countries in opposing international supervision of resources.
135
 At 
Kyoto, in 1997 , China and the G77 opposed binding emissions reduction obligations on developing 
countries.
136
 China ratified the Kyoto Protocol in 2002 and announced that it would consider future 
emissions reduction obligations.
137
 However, non-ratification of the protocol by the US and limited 
progress at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in 2002 and at the Copenhagen 
Climate Change Conference in 2009 (COP15) undermined confidence in multilateral processes. 
Global resource governance began to fragment, with a proliferation of ‘softer’, voluntary initiatives 
based on coalitions of business, NGOs, cities and/or governments. 
3.1.4 Global financial crisis and resources boom 2008–14
Resource prices and price volatility started to climb from 2004 and peaked in 2008–09, putting 
resource security back on the global agenda. Yet political and economic cooperation became more 
difficult as major economies focused on competitiveness issues, and investment and trade disputes 
over resources increased.
138
 The global financial crisis in 2008 gave the G20 new impetus, and it 
soon broadened its scope from economic cooperation to energy and natural resources. By this 
point, emerging economies accounted for nearly all growth in demand for resources.
139
 Accordingly, 
they began to make a growing contribution to dialogues at the G20 and the IEA, although existing 
organizations were generally slow to adapt to the new realities. 
Throughout this period, high resource prices and technology breakthroughs led to renewed interest in 
deep-sea mining, the Arctic and other sensitive areas, and encouraged investment in smaller resource 
producers. China expressed increasing interest in Arctic affairs and was granted observer status at the 
Arctic Council in 2013.
140
 One priority for China seems to be to ensure that the Arctic and its resources 
remain open to non-Arctic states.
141
 The issue of maritime jurisdiction in the seas around China has 
also increased in prominence, not least due to their relevance for navigation purposes, fishing and 
hydrocarbon resources.
142 
Major negotiations on trade at the WTO, on UNCLOS and on climate change remained stalled. 
China took a more assertive stance on trade in the wake of the global financial crisis, which severely 
affected it in terms of a decline in exports and an increase in litigation over access to foreign markets 
for its products.
143 
At COP15 in 2009, China maintained the stance it had taken at previous climate 
conferences, upholding the principle of ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’.
144
 For the first 
time, an accord was struck that provided for ‘explicit emission pledges by all the major economies’, 
including China and other emerging economies. However, there remained no clear path towards a 
treaty with binding commitments.
145

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
22 
Figure 6: The four phases of global resource governance 
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
2004
2008
2012
2016
2020
T rade and investment
Sea and sovereignty
Energy
Metals and minerals
Sustainable production 
and consumption
IBRD 
GATT 
Bretton Woods 
IFC 
UNCLOS (I) 
IMO 
UN 
Antarctic
Treaty 
OECD 
UN
resolution 
1803 
UNGA (Declaration
of Principles) 
IOPC 1971
Fund Convention 
MARPOL 
London Convention 
UNCTAD (1st Conference) 
ICSID 
UNIDO 
UNCITRAL UNCITRAL
(arbitration
rules adopted) 
UNCLOS (III) 
MARPOL
(entry into
force) 
IOPC 1992 Fund Convention 
Antarctic
Treaty (protocol on
environment) 
Basel Convention 
WTO 
MIGA 
Arctic Council 
UNCLOS 
London Protocol 
Combined Maritime Forces 
IOPC Supplementary Fund Protocol 
IEF 
ECT 
IEF
(JODI) 
G20 Energy Subsidies
Initiative 
IRENA 
IEA Joint Declaration
on Association 
EITI 
Kimberly 
Process 
Equator
Principles 
BRICS Bank 
UNCITRAL (arbitration
rules revised) 
Green Bond
Principles 
AIIB 
TPP 
CTF – 151 
Polar Code 
UNCLOS IA 
IGF 
COP21 GGGI 
COP15 
GGFR 
WSSD 
UNEP Marrakech Process on SCP 
UNEP Intl Resource Panel 
Rio + 20 
WEF/EMF 
Intl Copper Study Group 
WBCSD 
UNFCCC 
Kyoto 
Protocol 
Global Compact 
Montreal
Protocol 
UNCHE 
Intl Tin Agreement (collapse) 
Intl Nickel Study Group 
IEA 
Intl Lead and Zinc Study Group 
OPEC 
IAEA 
Intl Tin Council 
Intl Tin Study Group 
Bretton Woods era and stable 
commodity prices 1944–1972
From oil shocks and 
instability to
globalization redux 
1973–1988
From the Washington Consensus to the 
mainstreaming of sustainable 
development 1989–2007
Global 
ﬁnancial crisis 
and resources 
boom 
2008–2014
What next? 
2015–
Source: Chatham House mapping of global resource governance mechanisms (2015).
Note: See ‘Acronyms and abbreviations’ for full names.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
23 
3.1.5 The end of the resources boom 
With the end of the resources boom a new era is beginning. This time emerging economies are 
the key agents of change in international processes. The shale gas revolution has changed the 
strategic outlook for the US and for the global resources landscape. The Chinese–US deal on climate 
change in 2014, which was reaffirmed the following year with a Joint Presidential Statement, was 
a defining moment that injected momentum into global negotiations, and in late 2015 the Paris 
climate negotiations produced a groundbreaking deal on climate change. This may set a precedent 
for other challenging issues. In other areas, the two countries have been pursuing parallel tracks. 
China has begun to explore arrangements such as the NDB and the AIIB. The US has been pursuing 
trade deals such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership (TTIP). 
3.2 Evolving challenges and emerging actors 
Emerging economies are trying to define their role within this shifting landscape. Since the 
financial crisis, they have taken on a growing role in global economic governance through forums 
such as the G20, but they have struggled to effect fundamental reforms at the multilateral level.
146
 
Equally, incumbent powers face the dilemma of how to integrate rising powers into existing 
governance systems while trying to maintain their privileged position in the order and, they 
argue, protect the integrity of rules-based global trade.
147
 
Scepticism about the ability to deliver effective global governance through formal, universal 
multilateral processes partly explains the proliferation of issue-specific organizations, often based 
on voluntary agreements rather than binding rules. Failure to reach consensus in key negotiations 
such as the WTO Doha round and the Copenhagen Climate Conference, as well as slow progress in 
reforming institutions such as the UN, the World Bank and the IMF, have all fed this sentiment.
While the outcome of the Paris Climate Change Conference suggests that deadlock at the 
multilateral level can sometimes be overcome, the reality is that many recent innovations in 
governance have emerged out of softer, more flexible models of cooperation. A growing number 
of global governance initiatives in recent years have relied on a ‘coalition of the willing’ approach, 
bringing together smaller ad hoc groups of governments and other stakeholders to address specific 
issues. The most prominent new institution to emerge this way is the G20, but others – such as 
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and the International Renewable Energy 
Agency (IRENA) – have followed a similar model.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
24 
4. Key challenges in global resource 
governance
The political priorities accorded to different resource challenges naturally shift in line with broader 
perceptions of price and supply security. Many practical, policy-level challenges – building oil 
stockpiles, for example – become easier in a low-price scenario. Where more strategic questions are 
concerned, such as investing in the security of maritime and resource corridors or in global energy 
governance mechanisms, the risk is that the ‘perception of plenty’ results in these issues sliding down 
the political agenda. The paradox is that in many cases there is the least political momentum when it 
is easiest to act. How long the current window of opportunity will last before prices return to higher 
levels is impossible to predict.
Other structural changes in the global outlook transcend commodity price signals. As the world has 
become more interdependent, few challenges can be resolved by individual actors. In many sectors, 
an innovation-driven economy is proving highly disruptive to incumbent businesses and potentially 
for resource use and production, from shale gas and renewable energies to electric vehicles. Equally 
important is the emergence of new actors over the past 10 years or so, in particular the rise of 
emerging economies and the importance of non-state actors. They all pose questions for existing 
governance structures. 
Summoning the requisite political capital to forge new solutions requires a re-evaluation of the 
nature of governance challenges. While acknowledging the diversity of conceptual frameworks and 
actors in play, this section investigates the overall coverage and quality of global resource governance. 
It focuses on whether current models are sufficient to address the key concerns for China outlined in 
Section 2: ensuring that global trade and markets work, maintaining the security of resource flows, 
the political and commercial risks of resource investment, and pressure on the global resources 
system. It also highlights potential areas of action and investment in the light of China’s economic 
and structural transition.
4.1 Gaps and opportunities 
4.1.1 Efficient, rules-based global markets 
As the previous sections have highlighted, a decade of high prices and demand exposed many of the 
gaps in the rules governing the global resource trade. Notably, many of the pillars of global trade were 
not specifically designed to manage natural resources. WTO rules, for example, focus on imports rather 
than exports and provide widely applied exemptions for exhaustible resources. Throughout the resource 
boom, the proliferation of export controls put additional pressure on global markets and hurt consumer 
countries.
148
 These have demonstrated the limitations of the policy ‘toolkit’ available to governments in 
relation to such trade distortions.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
25 
Controls on raw material exports are routinely applied by governments for a variety of policy goals, 
such as sheltering domestic consumers, providing processing industries with low-cost supplies, or 
to avoid environmental harm.
149
 Iron ore export bans imposed by India may have cost China $30 
billion in 2013, and Indonesia’s decision to ban exports of nickel contributed to a 35 per cent increase 
in prices in 2014.
150
 Many of the drivers of export restrictions – such as developing and protecting 
domestic industry – are proving sustained despite lower prices.
151
High levels of price volatility increased the pressure on governments to identify and manage tensions 
arising from resources markets. Key proposals to address export restrictions have included voluntary 
agreements on the use of export controls, ‘early warning’ of potential trade-related measures, and the 
development of ‘win-win’ arrangements – using incentives such as investment packages or technology-
sharing in order to encourage producer countries to abstain from imposing restrictions.
152
 The role of 
emerging economies in pursuing such measures at the G20 has also been stressed.
153
 
Today, oversupplied resource markets risk triggering new trade tensions among supplier countries 
and companies. The new winners and losers in metals and minerals markets are clear, with higher-
cost, marginal producers coming under intense pressure. In iron ore markets, for example, the ‘big 
three’ iron ore producers (BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Vale) capitalized on low production costs by 
ramping up production, in an apparent attempt to drive high-cost producers out of the market.
154 
The fourth-largest iron ore producer, Fortescue Metals Group, whose emergence could have been 
interpreted as evidence of a competitive market, called for a cutback in production in early 2015 
as prices plummeted.
155
New trade tensions among consumer countries are another likely outcome. Where heavy industry 
is concerned, China’s steel demand contracted in 2014 for the first time since 1995, and this trend is 
expected to continue in 2015 and 2016, with no rebound expected in the medium term.
156
 The OECD 
states that the steel sector accounted for 5–25 per cent of trade complaints to the WTO between 
2010 and 2015, and that remedies including countervailing duties and anti-dumping measures are 
disproportionately used by steelmakers.
157
 Steelmakers in the US and the EU, for example, renewed 
their calls for action to protect domestic industries against cheap Chinese steel exports in 2015.
158
 
At the same time, sophisticated forms of manipulation at the intersection of physical and financial 
markets remain a challenge at the global level. The practices of some aluminium warehousing 
companies on the London Metal Exchange (LME), for example, kept large inventories off global 
markets and threatened the integrity of the pricing mechanism.
159
 Analysts claimed that warehousing 
practices on the LME cost consumer companies in the region of $3 billion per year.
160
 However, 
without inflated premiums at least 80 per cent of global aluminium production would be loss-
making.
161
 Investigations into the Qingdao scandal in China
162
 and Wall Street’s involvement with 
physical commodities
163
 have brought these challenges to the top of the political agenda. 
Reforms are underway. Opaque pricing mechanisms for many precious metals, including gold and 
silver, have been replaced.
164
 Recently introduced rules governing the rate at which metals warehouses 
‘load out’ are contributing, in part, to recent reductions in aluminium premiums.
165
 Yet, developing 
effective and comprehensive responses will remain challenging given unclear or overlapping 
jurisdictions, the role of non-state actors, and low levels of transparent market data on metals 
and minerals.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
26 
Could China demonstrate leadership in the management of global resource markets? 
China has often been accused of driving disputes in international resource markets. Where export 
restrictions are concerned, it has been heavily criticized for its decision to implement quotas on 
rare earth elements.
166
 These were removed following a WTO ruling.
167
 Yet China is almost certainly 
the country most exposed to export controls in other markets and it has a significant stake in this 
arena. It is also one of the few countries that agreed to curtail export restrictions, as part of its 
WTO accession.
168
China has shown leadership in areas such as the use of merger controls to mitigate the impact of 
cartels and anticompetitive practices. Its intervention in the Glencore–Xstrata merger resulted in 
its first acquisition of a world-class ‘greenfield’ site, when Chinese company MMG acquired the Las 
Bambas copper project in Peru in 2014.
169
 In the global potash market, China’s Ministry of Commerce 
agreed to the merger between Russian and Belarusian potash companies that led to the creation of 
Uralkali in return for a significant discount against world potash prices, which effectively immunized 
China from the weight of the cartel.
170
 China could use this negotiating power to the benefit of other 
major consumers such as India. 
As China expands its presence in international commodities and financial markets, the reality is that 
any effective solution will require its cooperation. The volumes traded on Chinese exchanges now 
exceed those in London or New York.
171
 China’s presence and pricing power in international markets 
are expanding; the Bank of China became the first Chinese bank to participate in the reformed 
London Gold Fix,
172
 and Chinese companies have acquired a controlling share in Standard Bank’s 
London-based business
173
 and the LME warehousing company Henry Bath.
174
 The establishment 
of the Shanghai Gold Exchange (SGE)
175
 and oil futures contracts on the Shanghai International 
Energy Exchange (INE)
176
 should increase China’s pricing power. The most pronounced sign of 
China’s growing importance in global financial markets may be the IMF’s decision in late 2015 
to include the renminbi in its elite basket of reserve currencies.
177
Where global resource markets are concerned, soft dialogues and improved collection and publication 
of data could represent ‘quick wins’ for China. Information about its growth trajectory and future 
resource needs have profound impacts on global markets. If China participates with other countries 
in dialogue and data sharing around competitive markets, such as on transparent pricing and metals 
financing, this could aid market stability. Moreover, China’s entry into global commodities exchanges 
and trading platforms is bound to face opposition from established powers, especially around data, 
transparency and cyber security. A proactive role on these issues – for instance through a high-level 
forum or dialogue – might help to alleviate those concerns. 
4.1.2 Secure and resilient resource flows
Risks to resource flows are likely to remain a significant concern for policy-makers. Despite the 
recent slackening in commodities markets, global resource trade remains at record volumes despite 
lower prices, at levels five times those of 2000.
178
 Looking to the future, trade in resources will grow 
broadly in line with consumption. At the same time, climate change and water scarcity will pose 
a growing threat to resource production and transit infrastructure. If lower prices undermine the 
case for investment in physical and governance structures, there is a real risk of resource insecurity 
returning to the fore in the 2020s. Maritime security equally remains a concern, whether due to 
potential state intervention or the threat of piracy.
179

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
27 
Emergency response mechanisms, in particular, have been undermined as energy interdependencies 
have shifted east and increased in their complexity. An event such as the oil shocks of the 1970s, 
which were the driving force behind the creation of the IEA and had only limited impact on China 
at the time,
180
 would now pose a major challenge for the country.
181
 Today, the IEA remains the key 
organization for emergency response mechanisms for energy. Its 29 OECD member countries still 
hold most of the world’s strategic oil stocks, with the US alone holding nearly 700 million barrels of 
crude. However, it lacks participation by key players; in 2012, non-OECD oil demand overtook that 
of countries in the OECD.
182 
The key frameworks that underpin international supply security are dealing with considerable 
pressures and the increasing the risk of fragmentation. For example, as the US becomes increasingly 
energy-independent, questions have been raised about its commitment to global energy governance 
mechanisms, maritime security and stability in the Middle East. Yet US support for the reforms 
necessary for the inclusion of China and other emerging economies within the IEA will still be critical 
to unlocking the politics behind such reform. At the same time, one of the most important facilitators 
of resource trade, UNCLOS, is struggling to address the interlinked issues of sovereignty, resources 
and freedom of navigation. 
How to integrate emerging economies into an inflexible system?
Emerging economies are playing a greater role in the governance mechanisms around physical 
resource flows. International organizations were quick to recognize the importance of engaging with 
emerging economies, particularly China, given their role throughout the resources boom and in the 
wake of the financial crisis. In 2013, an ‘association agreement’ was proposed between the IEA and the 
BRICS countries, with the intention of building on existing bilateral work programmes and pledging 
closer cooperation.
183
 Two years later, China, Indonesia and Thailand activated their associations.
184
 
The IEA’s new executive director, Fatih Birol, also sent a strong signal by making China his first official 
visit, rather than an IEA member country.
185
 Yet despite rhetorical commitments and increasing 
technical cooperation, considerable political barriers to enhanced participation remain, not least 
within the IEA. 
Where maritime security arrangements are concerned, China is playing a growing role in 
coordination with other countries. It has increasingly engaged in anti-piracy efforts in recent 
years. Its navy is not a member of the US-led Combined Maritime Forces, but it has collaborated 
on Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor (IRTC) security. It also participates in Shared 
Awareness & Deconfliction (SHADE), a forum for dialogue between multilateral maritime forces 
and unilateral actors, alongside other major emerging economies including India and Brazil.
186
 
However, more formal cooperation would be challenging, especially where there is a need to 
integrate communications and adopt common protocols. 
Keeping resource security high on the international agenda 
Structural changes in China will provide new imperatives and opportunities for cooperation. Its 
exposure to resource flow disruptions is likely to broaden as resource-intensive heavy industries are 
superseded by a high-tech, service-orientated economy, and as the private sector takes on a growing 
role. The growth of many green technologies, for example, will depend on environmentally and 
strategically secure supplies of precious metals and rare earths as well as silicon derivatives such 
as polysilicon. China will still need to import large volumes of ‘traditional’ raw materials, such as 
fossil fuels and iron ore, due to ongoing urbanization, development of the western regions and the

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
28 
continuing importance of heavy industries. For some resources – notably oil and gas – consumption 
is expected to climb significantly in the next decade.
187
 
A period of lower prices may also expedite investment in resilience. In line with advice from 
international organizations, countries such as Indonesia, India and Malaysia have implemented energy 
price reforms in the past year.
188
 China has accelerated the filling of strategic stockpiles, causing oil 
imports to pass 7 million barrels per day for the first time in early 2015, overtaking the US as the world’s 
biggest importer of crude oil.
189
 China, as well as IEA members Japan and South Korea, is increasingly 
well prepared for an oil shock, while other Asian countries, including India and smaller countries, are 
more exposed.
190
 Particularly where emergency response measures are concerned, there is clear scope 
for increased regional cooperation and alignment. 
Lower prices may also provide a less heated political environment in which to accelerate coordination 
and cooperation on the physical security of resource flows. There are many examples of cooperative 
governance of shared resources and key resource corridors, such as the Arctic Council’s management 
of Western claims in the Arctic, UNCLOS’s freedom of navigation rights and the Antarctic Treaty. 
However limited these may be, and however fraught with tension, engagement with processes that 
‘pick up the pieces’ on resource issues remains the starting point, for example with UNCLOS and the 
Energy Charter Treaty. 
The risk is that the political imperative to foster cooperative responses may fade due to the ‘perspective 
of plenty’. With lower prices and a surplus of key materials such as oil, coal and iron ore in 2015, the 
immediate risk of supply disruption and severe price spikes appears reduced, compared with the tight 
markets and low buffer stocks of recent years.
191
 So far, the ‘next China’ has not materialized in resources 
markets, and it is unlikely that India and other emerging economies will step into this role in the near 
future. Meanwhile, the number of incidents of piracy has fallen.
192
 This may result in governments and 
businesses becoming less focused on supply security and emergency response mechanisms.
China’s chair of the G20 in 2016 presents an opportunity to help steer the global resource 
governance agenda. The G20 could play a valuable role in fostering cooperation on energy and 
metals, but concrete outcomes have so far been limited to data sharing and the commitment to phase 
out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies.
193
 Informal producer–consumer dialogues such as the IEF provide 
additional avenues for China to help shape the agenda at the political level, and increasingly at the 
industry level, with participation by state-owned enterprise members. Without deeper engagement 
with China and other emerging economies, the risk of fragmentation in the mechanisms that ensure 
the security and resilience of resource flows is likely to rise. 
4.1.3 Open and improved investment 
Investment decisions already look different. International oil companies (IOCs) are facing tough 
choices regarding their capital expenditure in a lower-price environment, cutting capital expenditure 
in complex developments and withholding final investment decisions. China’s national oil companies 
(NOCs) appear to have adopted a more cautious strategy too, rather than capitalizing on the low oil 
price and picking up ‘bargains’. Overseas investments by China’s big three NOCs fell by seven-eighths 
year on year to just $2.8 billion in 2014.
194
 In the mining sector, Chinese companies appeared to defy 
the downward trend, with investments worth $10 billion in 2014, although this was dominated by 
the one-off acquisition of the $7 billion Las Bambas project in Peru.
195

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
29 
China’s investment remains crucial to meeting the sustainable investment challenge. At the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in late 2014, President Xi announced that China’s 
outbound investment would total $1.25 trillion over the next decade.
196
 This could provide a sizeable 
percentage of the cumulative $15 trillion – or annual spend of $660 billion – in upstream oil and 
gas investment that the IEA says is required by 2035 in order to keep pace with expanding global 
demand.
197
 Although China’s overseas investments are diversifying into infrastructure and moving up 
the value chain, there remains little prospect of delivering the required expansion in global resource 
supplies in the next decade without major investment from China and other emerging economies. 
Substantial investment gaps in areas such as resource efficiency, renewables, enhancing resilience to 
climate change, water, agriculture, and transport infrastructure have also been identified. The Asian 
Development Bank Institute estimates that at least $8 trillion is required in infrastructure investment 
between 2010 and 2020 in order to ensure the region’s continued growth.
198
 Globally, New Climate 
Economy figures suggest that some $90 trillion investment in climate-smart infrastructure is required 
between 2015 and 2030 in order to maintain economic growth, which means spending $6 trillion per 
year instead of the current $1.7 trillion.
199
 
This all suggests the need to scale up sustainable investment at the global level. The questions are 
how to scale up, and how to steer investment into higher-quality, growth-supporting activities. 
How to de-risk sustainable investment?
Multilateral development banks are increasingly important global governance actors. Given the 
inability of the private sector to meet investment needs at the speed and scale required, major public-
private partnerships will be critical to key infrastructure and other resource-related investments. 
An early estimate from the investment bank HSBC suggested that expenditure on the Belt and Road 
initiative could reach $232 billion in the coming years, equivalent to two-thirds of the World Bank’s 
balance sheet.
200 
At the same time, the global financial crisis has undermined the financial capacity of 
US and European-led institutions. The establishment of the NDB, the Silk Road Fund and the AIIB, 
as well as China’s recapitalization of the China Development Bank (CDB) and China Exim Bank,
201 
helps address the shortcomings of existing multilateral institutions in terms of stakeholder coverage 
and capital.
Effectively ‘de-risking’ investment will require innovation and better coherence between some of 
the ‘harder’ governance tools. De-risking investments through political risk guarantees such as the 
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and international arbitration facilities like the 
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) has become a standard feature 
of the investment landscape. International trade regulations provided by the WTO and regional 
frameworks play a supporting role, facilitating the movement of essential materials and services. 
Where regulatory coverage is lacking, other mechanisms are bridging the gaps to varying extents. In 
Central Asian countries that are not members of the WTO, the Energy Charter Treaty provides binding 
freedom of transit and freedom of trade and goods provisions, as well as an investment dispute 
mechanism and energy efficiency standards. 
China’s resource investors, both at home and abroad, will also have to ‘leapfrog’ up the learning 
curve if they are to transition into commercial actors and survive intense competition in a lower-price 
environment. The risks are real – downwards price pressure and shifting resource production and 
consumption patterns are already driving higher-cost producers out of the market. For China and

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
30 
other emerging economies this can represent an opportunity, but one that will require investment, 
coordination and dialogue with a range of international actors on strategic and operational issues. 
Now is the time to build upon emerging sustainable investment norms 
International norms around responsible and sustainable resource investment have proliferated over 
the past decade. Many initiatives are issue-specific and primarily focus on overcoming one aspect of the 
‘resource curse’. The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) aims to prevent corruption and 
other negative governance outcomes by enhancing transparency around resource-related payments to 
governments. Others such as the Kimberley Process and OECD Due Diligence Guidelines seek to break 
the link between resources and conflict by enhancing the transparency and traceability of supply chains. 
At the same time, environmental, social and governance (ESG) risk frameworks that originated in 
multilateral banks, such as the International Finance Corporation’s (IFC) Performance Standards, 
are increasingly referenced in the market, from the Equator Principles which set project finance 
requirements, to the increasing number of exchanges that impose ESG listing requirements.
202
 
In an increasingly connected world where technology facilitates decentralized information flows, 
governments and resource investors can expect sustained scrutiny regarding the environmental and 
social impacts of resource development. Despite intense pressure on operating costs, consultants to 
the extractive sector continue to stress the need for investment in the facilitators of a strong social 
licence, from transparent and meaningful stakeholder consultation to support for local economic 
opportunities.
203
 Moreover, there is clear commercial logic – research has put the cost of company–
community conflict that results in commercial disruption to a major mining project at around $20 
million per week.
204
 
China has already championed ways of steering the financial sector in a more sustainable 
direction. Green bonds and credit guidelines from the China Banking Regulatory Commission 
(CBRC) and China Exim Bank are important developments, as are overseas investment guidelines 
developed by the China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals and Chemicals (CCCMC). 
However, for both Chinese and international initiatives, the extent to which lending guidelines 
and voluntary standards translate into better investment is often unclear. Better understanding 
of the varying interpretations of ‘best practice’, the effectiveness of different levers and the areas 
of alignment between different initiatives could help improve the overall quality of resource 
investments and the communications around them. 
Today, these norms are shifting once again in response to the threats presented by climate change. 
Climate change risks and the immediate impacts of resource production and consumption on local air 
quality and pollution are causing critical financial actors to redraw their strategies. The World Bank 
will only fund coal-fired power stations in the most exceptional circumstances,
205
 and has dramatically 
increased its issuance of green bonds.
206
 Institutional investors have followed suit, in response to the 
risk of ‘stranded assets’. Norway’s $900 million sovereign wealth fund and France’s biggest insurer, 
Axa, for example, have announced the divestment of their coal assets in recent months, with the 
latter tripling its green investment at the same time.
207
 
Nonetheless, the continued commitment of some companies to Arctic, seabed and even outer space 
exploration suggests that the race between technology and resource prices is still on. How China and 
other resource investors approach these sensitive operating environments will have huge influence 
over the priority and protection accorded to them at the policy, financial and operating levels.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
31 
Outbound investment through the AIIB and other institutions will be the litmus test of China’s 
approach. As it embarks upon development of the Silk Road Economic Belt, in particular, perception 
of its commitment to global resource governance will be shaped by how it manages the increasing 
number of relationships and complex risks that new institutions such as the AIIB and their 
beneficiaries will face. Consultations on the AIIB’s draft Environmental and Social Framework 
have begun,
208
 but some have raised concerns regarding consultation and implementation.
209
 
At this juncture, China has considerable scope to influence how international norms in relation 
to environmental, social and climate change impacts are taken forward, and the extent to 
which they complement or diverge from existing multilateral frameworks will be central to 
international perception.
4.1.4 Fostering innovation and reform
Innovation will sit at the heart of China’s new normal. Premier Li Keqiang has made it clear that it 
should be a key driver of China’s development and ongoing economic reforms.
210
 China will face great 
structural challenges in reforming its industrial base as it attempts to direct the engine of its economy 
towards a high-tech, service-orientated growth model. Fostering new industries and boosting R&D 
and advanced manufacturing will be critical to generating employment and addressing many of the 
challenges that threaten to undermine long-term development and prosperity, from air pollution to 
water scarcity. 
China’s domestic reforms could make an important contribution to global efforts to stay within 
environmental boundaries. Given its role in the global resource landscape, slower demand in the 
new normal will make a major contribution to relieving pressure on global resource systems. The 
innovation required to manage transition may also help unlock some of the fundamental economic and 
social challenges that currently hold back the global green transition. This cannot be done by China 
alone. How to encourage joint effort on innovation and how to strike an appropriate balance between 
competition and cooperation are among the most pressing questions facing China and the world today.
Technology revolutions in shale and renewables are already redefining the supply side of the global 
resource landscape. Electric vehicles, rapid development of advanced materials and other key sectors 
will have similarly disruptive impacts on the demand side. These could all present economic and 
employment opportunities. Yet without clear policy frameworks, uncertainty is likely to undermine 
investment and reform, complicating both the introduction of more ambitious resource efficiency 
targets and measures, and the reform of energy and resource production and consumption pathways. 
This underscores the need for clear policy signals. 
Building an innovation-driven economy 
For China and other major resource consumers, the windfall created by low resource prices can help 
mitigate the impact of declining industrial production and expedite innovation at the macroeconomic 
level. China is already investing heavily in R&D, but it is also looking to use a mix of regulatory 
measures, financial instruments and incentives, and support for the wider enabling ecosystem that 
will promote ‘Industry 4.0’ (see Box 5) and the circular economy, where industrial structures are 
rewired along ecological lines to ensure that waste from one factory becomes a useful resource for 
another, that products are made from sustainable materials, and that consumer products can be 
repaired and ‘remanufactured’ or are designed to biodegrade safely.
2 11

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
32 
Moving up the value chain will also enable China to drive change downwards. Its investments 
are increasingly targeting new technologies, ‘big data’ and advanced manufacturing processes. 
China’s total ICT market will surpass $300 billion by 2020.
212
 This means that investment 
decisions, market position and manufacturing power could be leveraged to raise global ambition 
on efficiency targets and regulatory standards. China could work with other major economies on 
catalysing smart approaches through joint data collection, and spreading common protocols and 
technology standards. 
With increasingly complex technology systems and diffuse patterns of knowledge generation, cross-
border cooperation between countries and companies will be crucial. Yet innovation cooperation is 
still primarily a national, not an international, activity.
213
 Overcoming this will be critical to fostering 
innovation at the speed and scale necessary to meet the economic, environmental and social 
challenges of China and the world. 
Box 5: Industry 4.0 and ‘Made in China 2025’
The ‘Internet of Things’ and the use of embedded smart systems in the production process have the 
potential to usher in a fourth industrial revolution. Industry 4.0, the production line of the future, will 
be characterized by networks of interconnected systems, resources and people, leading to more 
adaptable and resource-efficient manufacturing processes. In the current climate of slow or stagnant 
growth in global manufacturing, countries including the US, Japan, South Korea, Germany, India and 
China are recognizing the potential of new technology to reshape manufacturing and have developed 
strategies to support the transition to Industry 4.0. 
The Chinese strategy for Industry 4.0, ‘Made in China 2025’, was announced by the State Council 
in March 2015.
214
 Premier Li then outlined a 10-year vision to ‘seek innovation-driven development, 
apply smart technologies, strengthen foundations, pursue green development and redouble… 
efforts to upgrade China from a manufacturer of quantity to one of quality’.
215 
Made in China 2025 
aims to reform China’s manufacturing sector by establishing innovation centres, enhancing resource 
efficiency, fostering green growth, supporting high-end equipment innovation and thereby raising 
standards across the manufacturing industry. 
Made in China 2025 comes at a time when the manufacturing industry faces increasing headwinds 
amid uncertainties over the strength of global demand and increasing competition from low-cost 
producers. Macroeconomic adjustment to the new normal of slower but higher-quality growth will 
entail a gradual restructuring of the Chinese economy. 
The political momentum behind Made in China 2025 suggests that its effective implementation is 
viewed internally as critical to managing this shift. However, the scale of the challenge should not be 
underestimated. McKinsey has estimated that the internet adoption ratio among Chinese small and 
medium-sized enterprises is 20–25 per cent, compared with 72–85 per cent in the US.
216
 Additionally, 
while China’s manufacturing industry, estimated at $3.2 trillion in 2013, is the world’s largest, much of 
it requires upgrading.
217

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
33 
Industrial upgrading and transition will require careful management. China is already at the 
turning point for coal and is facing the risk of less profitable domestic resource and heavy industries 
as it reforms. Continually improving resource efficiency and productivity is critical to maintaining the 
competitiveness of domestic industries, particularly where heavy industries are facing overcapacity. 
Provinces where the economy is dominated by heavy industry will need greater assistance to make the 
transition. China already has a strong record on managing incumbent industries and actors, but much 
more will be needed as the engine of China’s growth shifts higher up the value chain. Reform of the 
power sector presents particular challenges – and opportunities.
At the same time, investing in efficiency remains the best line of defence against resource price volatility. 
A more efficient economy is more competitive and less exposed to price fluctuations. Lower resource 
prices present a window of opportunity for governments to reform resource prices in order to encourage 
resource efficiency – for example, by removing consumption subsidies and imposing resource taxes. 
While price reform is predominantly an area of national competency, the G20’s commitment to phase 
out energy subsidies showed that appetite for collective action can be developed.
218
These new production and consumption models will present ‘system-wide’ challenges. With increasingly 
complex global supply chains and growing trade in waste, cross-border harmonization will be vital 
to scaling up circular economy practices. Yet to date attempts to collaborate have been limited. One 
exception is the proposed China–Japan–Korea Circular Economy Model Bases, which aim to identify 
shared lessons but will be built with different characteristics according to the three countries’ respective 
needs.
219
 Beyond this, there is little in the way of a blueprint for governance or support.
New technologies and big data will help open new areas of cooperation and collaboration, but will 
also create tensions. Today, the collection and dissemination of data is increasingly decentralized, and 
sometimes beyond the control of official sources. Data collected by companies, communities and civil 
society is being shared and integrated to help provide new insights. Drones are being used to track the 
impacts of mining sites and to monitor pollution from the air.
220
China’s story on resource efficiency is a soft power asset 
Coordinated action on efficiency could make a huge difference to long-term resource demand. To 
date, action has remained largely at the national level. While states have made impressive gains, 
scaling these up has proved challenging. China is among the winners and has a strong story to tell 
in terms of tackling incumbency and driving incremental improvement on resource efficiency. How 
China develops this ‘national story’ and communicates it at the multilateral level will influence 
global ambition levels. 
Other developing countries could benefit from working with China on green growth pathways. China 
is expanding its role as a development partner, using its domestic experience and the overseas reach of 
its firms and diplomats. It could share its domestic challenges and progress on efficiency, sustainability 
and green finance as part of these relationships. 
Like many countries, China faces the problem of where resource challenges should sit institutionally, 
at home and abroad. Some of its key national agencies involved in resources governance take a 
backseat overseas, while diplomats and trade officials may not have the requisite expertise. There 
could be a need for some agencies to have a growing overseas role, engaging with enterprises and 
host governments. Encouraging them to do so may require clear incentives and direction from 
China’s leaders in the domestic and international arenas.

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
34 
4.2 The next phase of global resource governance 
Despite the proliferation of resource or issue-specific governance mechanisms in recent years, in 
many cases national legislation and the major multilateral institutions such as the WTO, UNCLOS 
and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) still have the greatest influence 
on resource production, trade and consumption. New actors and developments in technology and 
communications have made ‘bottom-up’ policy levers increasingly influential. However, it is states 
– and perhaps cities – that have the regulatory and fiscal capacities to address some the greatest 
resource challenges in supporting and developing an ecosystem that is conducive to innovation 
and international collaboration.
As outlined above, institutional and technological innovation will be critical to resolving the greatest 
resource governance challenges at a speed consistent with climate change and the growing pressures 
on resource systems. The solutions may come from unexpected places. Over the past decade, resource 
production and consumption patterns have changed dramatically and economic and political power 
has become increasingly diverse, bringing a range of actors into play. From managing volatility to 
fostering new business models, it is engagement with these new actors and approaches that will 
provide the fresh thinking and impetus required to overcome the deadlock that existing processes 
and institutions are experiencing. 
Following the UNFCCC climate negotiations in Paris, there are real questions about how to govern 
this space. New models of cooperation will require careful management in order to avoid tensions and 
disputes. Major disputes over PV panels, for example, demonstrate how innovation and disruptive 
change can quickly result in tensions. This reinforces the need for effective governance and dialogue 
at the multilateral trade level, to mitigate the risk of disputes and encourage collaboration between 
traditional and emerging actors. Without concerted action in all these areas, the risk is that narrow, 
zero-sum approaches will fill these governance gaps and add to systemic pressures. 
The following two sections examine the geopolitical undercurrents that will influence the outcome of 
the different pathways available to China and its international partners; and strategic and policy-level 
considerations for China and the international community, respectively.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
35 
5. Geopolitics, global governance 
and resources 
With growing pressures on the global resource system, an interconnected world and the emergence 
of new actors, strengthening and adapting resource governance should be a priority for China and the 
international community. Moreover, in several critical areas, most notably climate change, decisive 
action cannot be delayed if potentially unmanageable risks are to be avoided.
The recent fall in commodity prices could present a window of opportunity to address unsustainable 
production and consumption. Lower resource prices, for example, could allow governments to 
accelerate price reforms, remove subsidies, implement resource taxes and price in environmental 
externalities. More generally, some of the tensions about resource security that emerged during the 
commodity boom are likely to subside, creating a cooler, more favourable political environment for 
discussing governance reforms at forums like the G20.
Yet there are formidable obstacles to progress on global resource governance. There is a risk that 
cheaper commodities cause policy-makers in the major economies to focus on other, more pressing 
issues. In general, recent years have seen a tangible loss of faith in multilateralism and the opening 
up of a leadership deficit as power has become more diffuse, not only between states but also among 
non-state actors. 
Natural resource security and sustainability will be key issues for China during the 13th Five-Year 
Plan (2016–20) and beyond, and a touchstone issue within its growing contribution to the creation 
of global goods. But there are also barriers to China assuming a progressive, reforming role on global 
resource governance. As the establishment of the AIIB showed, new instruments or processes can 
be seen as a challenge to the existing rules-based order. In many areas, there are costs and benefits 
for China in taking a more active role that would need to be managed. This section explores these 
geopolitical dynamics surrounding China’s growing global role.
5.1 Future directions of travel 
A critical strategic question for China and the world emerges from the analysis in Section 4. If 
China chooses to invest in cooperative approaches and multilateral solutions that are in line with its 
resource and development needs, these initiatives will stand a good chance of success – because of 
its central importance in resources markets; because it has the institutional, economic and political 
capacities to implement and enforce these arrangements; and because other developing countries 
will look to it for leadership. On the other hand, if China chooses to step back from cooperative 
approaches, this will change the cost-benefit calculations of other players and is likely to lead to a 
further erosion of the rules-based system as it applies to resources.
China’s broad direction of travel on the governance of natural resources will be a critical issue for the 
next decade, both for China and for the international community. Here, it is helpful to consider two

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
36 
key variables. First, the extent to which China pursues a passive/reactive approach or takes a more 
active or leadership role. Second, whether it ‘builds from within’ the existing systems and mechanisms 
for managing resources, or chooses to ‘go outside’, either building parallel approaches or withdrawing 
from international efforts. Of course, there will be no one-size-fits-all solutions. China will take a 
variety of approaches to different resource-related issues, depending on the specific challenges or 
existing geopolitical dynamics. 
Figure 7: Potential directions of travel for China 
Alternative system-building
Concerns about Western dominance 
lead China to have limited engagement 
with existing institutions. China instead 
develops parallel institutions and 
coalitions of the committed.
Cooperative leadership with 
Chinese characteristics
China adjusts its stance increasingly 
towards broad (though not universal) 
participation and leadership in GRG 
mechanisms, with investment in 
institutional capacity. This is in 
combination with ‘bilateral vigour’, 
but such ties are used to reinforce 
cooperative efforts.
Unilateral disengagement 
China rows back from the 
growing interest in multilateral 
efforts of recent times, and renews 
focus on a web of bilateralities, 
diversiﬁcation of supplies and 
self-sufﬁciency.
Selective engagement
China participates actively in some 
resource governance mechanisms 
but only where it can see a direct 
economic/security interest in the 
medium term. In the past China has 
considered this approach to best 
serve its interests.
Active and cooperative
More passive or reactive
Outside existing system
Within existing system
Each of the four directions of travel set out in Figure 7 has different costs and benefits. A strategy that 
combines ‘alternative system building’ with ‘cooperative leadership’ could be the most advantageous, 
but would require considerable emphasis on integration and synergy as well as significant investment. 
It could apply, for example, to a regional approach to oil security combined with IEA membership, or 
to Chinese leadership within the Energy Charter Treaty, as well as the example of the AIIB and NDB 
(see below). 
Such a strategy would build on rather than replace existing efforts. For example, strong bilateral 
ties over resources could be leveraged more actively by China to achieve change via multilateral 
processes. At regional level, a stronger ‘resource dimension’ could be introduced in the 21 partnership

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
37 
agreements it has signed with Asian countries
221
 and through the Forum on China–Africa Cooperation 
(FOCAC) and the China–CELAC (Community of Latin American and Caribbean States) Forum. The 
US–Chinese climate accord of 2014 could also be a model for cooperation between the two countries 
on some of the more sensitive issues around natural resources.
Perhaps the most high-risk strategy for China and the world would be ‘unilateral disengagement’. A 
passive China would contribute to a continued erosion of confidence in global institutions, and to a 
lack of strategic foresight and coordinated action at the global level. This could result in higher costs 
imposed via climate change, regional insecurity or a breakdown in global trade. The risks would likely 
grow over time, due to the rising non-OECD share of global economic growth, resource consumption 
and greenhouse gas emissions, among other metrics. 
Of course, China’s direction of travel will be determined not only by its choices, but also by the actions 
and approaches of other countries. These include the extent to which international actors welcome 
China to the table; the ‘price of entry’ in terms of the responsibility it takes on or principles it adopts 
when joining a multilateral process; whether other countries try to limit its influence due to perceived 
national security or competitiveness concerns; and the extent to which it encourages Chinese bottom-
up actors (for example enterprises, NGOs and cities) to play a role. 
Particularly for flagship Chinese initiatives such as the Belt and Road, it will be important to 
examine the costs, risks and benefits associated with different approaches; to ensure win-win 
outcomes are possible. This means exploring not only the required investments in institutional 
capacity and infrastructure but also the costs of inaction, such as potential friction with resource 
trading partners or potential for price volatility if markets are more vulnerable to shocks. As with 
climate change, it seems likely that the costs of inaction will vastly outweigh those of greater 
engagement, though it is important to consider how the costs, risks and benefits are likely to 
be distributed.
5.2 Avoiding potential flashpoints
China’s rise has led to major geopolitical shifts in the past decade. In part, these are a consequence 
of the inevitable concerns and caution that the emergence of a new power engenders. Such dynamics 
may go some way in explaining the often hostile response to Chinese resource-seeking investments 
witnessed in Africa, Latin America and other parts of the world (see Box 6).
Great attention has been focused on China’s relations with the US. Among foreign policy analysts 
there is much debate about whether or not China’s rise will necessarily lead to dangerous security 
competition with the US, or if a peaceful transition to a ‘new model of major power relations’ is 
possible.
222
 Geopolitical tensions, however, are influenced by perceptions and rhetoric as well as 
material realities. How this dynamic is perceived and understood will influence policy decisions 
and strategy in both countries. 
The US ‘pivot’ or ‘rebalancing’ towards Asia has been interpreted by some as part of a strategy to 
provide an economic and military counterweight to China in the region.
223 
Some analysts view the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement, which did not include China, as an element of this 
strategy. At the same time, the US has not joined the new, China-led AIIB; and when the UK applied 
to join, it was rebuked by a US official for its ‘constant accommodation’ of China.
224

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
38 
A second, and related, set of tensions exists over the contested territorial claims in the South and East China 
seas, which feature some of the most important sea lanes in the world and are rich in sub-sea mineral 
resources. They have long been considered potential geopolitical flashpoints, but frictions have increased 
in recent years. In the East China Sea, underlying tensions between China and Japan over disputed 
islands and Japan’s new security strategy remain high, despite some improvements in recent months.
225
 
In a broader context, China’s leaders have gone to great lengths to stress their commitment to 
peace and shared prosperity in Asia. Building stronger, positive relations with China’s periphery 
is one of their top diplomatic priorities. President Xi has said, for example, that China will ‘deepen 
win-win cooperation and connectivity with its neighbours to bring them even more benefit with 
its own development’.
226
5.2.1 Resources as a lightning rod
In the context of wider geopolitical flashpoints, attempts by China to enhance resource governance, 
however well intentioned, are not without risk. Access to, and control over, resources is a perennial 
source of inter-state conflict and, as such, resources can act as a lightning rod for wider tensions. The 
prospect of resource development in offshore and frontier regions can exacerbate territorial tensions 
among states, as governments jostle to stake out claims over the areas they suspect may contain 
recoverable minerals or hydrocarbons. Such dynamics are clear in the Arctic, for example.
Resource exploration in contested regions has the potential to escalate pre-existing tensions. The 
presence of valuable resources can lead to disputes over ownership, or in some specific circumstances, 
as a basis for cooperation. The UN secretary-general has called on Turkish and Greek Cypriot 
authorities to see offshore resources as a strong incentive to resolving the long-standing conflict in 
Cyprus, for example.
227
 Either way, however, resource investment in conflict-affected situations is 
unlikely to be neutral – it will have impact one way or another.
228
As to the importance of perceptions and rhetoric, in recent years China’s growing demand for 
resources and its ‘going out’ strategy have fed a pervasive narrative that it is engaged in ‘locking up’ 
or ‘grabbing’ resources (see Box 6). This is an exaggeration, but one that has undermined China’s 
reputation in parts of the world. 
Box 6: Perceptions of China’s resource acquisition strategy
China’s rapidly increasing resource demand over the past decade has led to concerns over its impact 
on markets, producer countries and geopolitical security. 
Some international commentators have accused China of trying to ‘lock up’ resources for its own use 
at the expense of the market, predicting massive price increases and volatility as a result. They blame 
China’s ‘politically-driven and geostrategic (rather than economic) approach’ to resource security,
229
 with 
Chinese companies paying ‘excessive’ prices for certain commodities for non-commercial reasons, 
and relying on artificially cheap finance from state-backed banks. Some have called for the exclusion of 
China from resource extraction in their respective countries or demanded that diplomatic pressure be 
brought to bear to bring Chinese practices into line with Western market-economy standards.

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
39 
In fact, the evidence suggests that Chinese investment in resource extraction abroad tends to 
expand and diversify the global energy supply system, as well as to make it more competitive. 
However, mixed with wider fears over China’s rise, other countries have seen this as a zero-sum 
game. To the extent that this has excluded China from markets and governance institutions, this 
may have become a self-fulfilling prophecy, preventing Chinese firms from relying on the open 
market, and doing little to encourage collaboration to ensure stable and sustainable supplies at 
competitive prices. 
Concerns have often been raised around the social, political and environmental impact of China’s 
resource trade with developing producer countries. It has faced criticism from host countries in Africa, 
for example, for not creating sufficient jobs for locals, contributing to perceptions of China as another 
neo-colonial power.
230
 Others have been concerned that its increasing role in resource extraction 
would lead to weaker environmental and social performance standards, particularly in countries 
with weak governance.
231
 Allegations of environmental and labour rights transgressions by Chinese 
companies have resulted in significant disputes in Gabon and Zambia, among others.
232
 Finally, 
China’s policy of condition-free investment and its deepening relationship with certain governments 
is viewed uneasily by some in the West, and has fed the pervasive narrative of ‘resource grabbing’ 
discussed above.
 233
 
While it is clear that the practices of some Chinese companies have caused genuine problems – 
now recognized by Chinese experts and officials – the worst fears have not always been justified. 
Even so, negative perceptions represent a genuine problem in the shifting political context of many 
producer countries. As China has found to its cost, an agreement with a host government does 
not guarantee a smooth trading relationship in the absence of a social licence to operate. China is 
gradually adjusting its approach to resource acquisition abroad as officials and companies increase 
capacity and learn from experience. However, unless China can demonstrate that it is a responsible 
stakeholder across a range of issues not directly related to resources, its long-term resource security 
risks being undermined by increasing scepticism from partner countries.
The connection between geopolitical tensions and China’s overseas investment in resources is most 
obvious in cases where resource extraction is perceived to impact on regional and global security. 
Increased tensions around territorial disputes in the seas around China have in part been attributed 
to resource security concerns. These seas are thought to hold significant hydrocarbon reserves, 
and act as key transport corridors for critical resources, particularly oil. According to the US Energy 
Information Administration (EIA),
 234
 27 per cent of all seaborne oil, or 15.2 million barrels per day, 
passed through the Malacca Strait in 2013, and over half of the global trade in LNG, about 6 trillion 
cubic feet, passed through the South China Sea in 201 1.
235 
Finally, perceived geopolitical competition has generated resistance to Chinese investment in 
domestic extraction, notably in the US and Australia, due to fears that China might use control over 
resources for political leverage. In these areas also, resource experts see proactive engagement rather 
than confrontation as the best way of ensuring resource security. The extent to which this view can 
penetrate into broader political debates, however, has yet to become clear.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
40 
5.3 The Belt and Road
Many of the issues discussed above converge around China’s Belt and Road initiative – an ambitious 
plan to link Eurasia, Europe and East Asia via Central Asia, Africa and the Middle East, through a 
network of overland and maritime infrastructure, including roads and rail lines, energy pipelines, 
power stations and coastal ports (see Box 7). 
This is not purely a resource initiative; China also intends the initiative to deepen trade in general 
and lead to greater economic and infrastructure integration within the region. However, as can be 
seen from the map in Box 7 , significant resources and environmentally sensitive areas lie along the 
overland Silk Road Economic Belt, and many of the countries are key resources trading partners of 
China. Meanwhile, the maritime components (the ‘Maritime Silk Road’) traverse particularly strategic 
sea lanes, most notably those associated with the transit of hydrocarbons from the Middle East and 
North Africa, from where China imports almost one-third of its oil.
Some of the key questions are as follows: will deeper trade and investment provide a route to defusing 
territorial disputes within the region, or will it escalate them if certain countries are marginalized or 
if maritime infrastructure is developed in contested waters? How will the US respond in the context 
of its pivot to Asia? How will Russia and India look upon the expansion of Chinese influence into their 
‘near abroad’? 
The initiative is clearly, therefore, a high-stakes test case, not only for China’s regional ambitions 
but also its resource governance ambitions. Countries in the region could benefit significantly, not 
only from infrastructure investment but also from normative alignment and deeper cooperation 
on resource governance and environmental security. But whether this is realized through the Belt 
and Road initiative will depend upon the actions of China, as well as the reactions of its neighbours 
and powers further afield. Success lies in an approach that builds trust and manages potential 
geopolitical flashpoints.
It is in China’s interests to signal its benign intentions clearly and early. The most obvious opportunity 
is through the adoption of best-practice social and environmental standards, whether attached 
to loans through the AIIB or the Silk Road Fund, or the business practices of Chinese companies 
investing and operating in partner countries. As such, the Belt and Road initiative provides a platform 
for China to demonstrate its leadership credentials and to advance a collaborative, responsible and 
environmentally sensitive resource governance agenda that ameliorates, rather than exacerbates, 
geopolitical tensions.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
41 
Box 7: China’s New Silk Road – risks and vulnerabilities
The Belt and Road initiative offers China a chance to showcase its commitment to global sustainable 
development. While the scope of the strategy stretches beyond resources to include, for example, an 
emphasis on cultural exchange, it will function as an important test of China’s management of natural 
resource challenges, from high-quality investment practices and protecting sensitive environments, to 
enhanced technological and financial cooperation on green technology and the circular economy. 
One key benefit of the initiative could be to enlarge market access for Chinese exports and secure 
supplies of raw materials in the Asia–Europe land and maritime corridors. China’s trade with Central 
Asian countries along the Silk Road Economic Belt rose by 680 per cent over the last decade.
236
 In 
terms of natural resources, these countries account for around 50 per cent and 16 per cent of global 
natural gas and oil reserves respectively. The Maritime Silk Road is less of a priority for resource trade, 
as these countries only make up 1 per cent and 3 per cent of global petroleum and natural gas reserves 
respectively (see Figures 8 and 9).
237
 The Maritime Silk Road does, however, play a crucial role in 
strengthening China’s energy security in that it helps to secure the transportation of oil from the Middle 
East. China has not only invested heavily in the maintenance of infrastructure at maritime ‘pinch 
points’, it also has plans to construct alternative routes to bypass these along the Maritime Silk Road.
 238
Figure 8: Resource reserves along the Belt and Road, as a percentage of total global reserves, 
by country
0
10
20
30
40
50
55
Oil Natural gas Coal Bauxite Zinc Copper Nickel 
%
Afghanistan Pakistan Kazakhstan 
Kyrgyzstan 
Iran 
Uzbekistan Russia Turkey Ukraine 
Turkmenistan Bangladesh Indonesia 
Malaysia Myanmar 
Thailand Vietnam Greece 
Iron ore 
5
15
25
35
45
Source: Chatham House (2015) analysis of USGS Commodity Statistics and Information. Selected countries based on recent 
papers on the Belt and Road.

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
42 
Figure 9: Reserves along the Belt and Road, as a percentage of total global reserves, by resource
Source: Chatham House (2015) analysis of USGS Commodity Statistics and Information. Selected countries (as above) based on 
recent papers on the Belt and Road.
The Belt and Road initiative is backed by a range of new Chinese-led regional funding mechanisms. 
These include the Silk Road Fund, the Energy Development Fund and the AIIB, which have been 
allocated $40 billion, $20 billion and $100 billion respectively.
239
 These funds will not only act to 
strengthen the economic growth and development of China’s neighbours, but will also work to 
integrate its financial market with the rest of Asia. Ambitious plans are in the works to enable Chinese 
and foreign companies and governments with good credit ratings to raise renminbi funds in China 
and countries along the Silk Road route.
 240
 This will both help to promote the internationalization of 
the renminbi and facilitate the financing of infrastructure projects along the Silk Road. 
The Belt and Road is not, however, exclusively outward-facing. It serves a number of important 
functions with regards to China’s domestic economy. As China’s economy enters a new normal, 
leaving behind double-digit economic growth, the Belt and Road is a means of reinvigorating growth 
by boosting exports to new markets. The policy is aimed specifically at connecting China’s more 
remote western regions to wider domestic and global markets. It is also seen as a short-term fix for 
the ongoing issue of overcapacity in China’s production sectors. The Belt and Road infrastructure 
projects have already been cited as a means of using excess Chinese steel and iron.
241
 In the context 
of the new normal and of the growing dialogue around ‘moving up the value chain’, Chinese policy-
makers will need to ensure that the Belt and Road initiative does not undermine domestic efforts 
to reallocate capital from energy-intensive, high-polluting industries towards higher value-added 
activities and services. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Oil Natural gas Iron ore Coal Bauxite Zinc Copper Nickel 
Silk Road Economic Belt Maritime Silk Road 
%

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
43 
Chokepoint
Tree cover Water scarcity
0–25%
25–50%
50–75%
75–100%
(2–3) 
Medium 
to high risk
(4–5) 
Extremely 
high risk
(3–4) 
High risk
Silk Road 
Economic Belt
Maritime Silk Road
China–Pakistan 
Economic Corridor
Natural gas pipeline
Crude oil pipeline
Proposed natural 
gas pipeline
Nairobi
Athens
Venice
Rotterdam
Moscow
Istanbul
Tehran
Colombo
Gwadar
Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur
Jakarta
Zhanjiang
Bishkek
Almaty
Urumqi
Xi’an
Shanghai
Beijing
Malacca Strait
Crude oil = 69%
Iron ore = 28%
Copper = 21%
Coal = 7%
Nickel = 1%
Strait of Hormuz
Crude oil = 42%
Iron ore = 2%
Copper = 1%
Bab-el-Mandeb Strait
Copper = 1 1%
Iron ore = 2%
Crude oil = 2%
Nickel = 1%
Suez Canal
Copper = 10%
Iron ore = 2%
Nickel = 1%
Crude oil = 1%
Figure 10: The Road and Belt
Source: Chatham House (2015) analysis of Chatham House Resource Trade Data, UN COMTRADE; Global Forest Change 2000–2014 University of Maryland; World Resources Institute Aqueduct 
Global Maps 2.1 Data. Note: Chokepoints – see Figure 5. Tree cover – canopy closure for all vegetation >5m in height, as a percentage per output grid cell, 0–100. Overall water risk – exposure 
to water-related risks, aggregated measure of all selected indicators from the Physical Quantity, Quality and Regulatory & Reputational Risk categories. Low risk (0–1), Low to medium risk (1–2), 
Medium to high risk (2–3), High risk (3–4), Extremely high risk (4–5).

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
44 
Another aspiration is to forge closer relationships with a wide range of countries and foster new 
collaborative initiatives. The success of the Belt and Road initiative will therefore rely heavily on 
how China’s neighbours and powers further afield perceive the policy. While Russia could benefit 
economically from a closer partnership with China and has signed a strategic agreement with China 
on the Silk Road, it is likely to have concerns about China’s deepening interest in its traditional sphere 
of influence. 
Several of China’s Asia-Pacific neighbours are also weighing up the potential implications. India 
has decided to join the AIIB, but has so far not indicated whether it will back the Belt and Road.
242
 
Indonesia, too, has so far only cautiously embraced the proposal, with President Joko Widodo 
stating that Indonesians were willing to ‘open our hands… as long as we can maintain our national 
interest’.
243
 Yet there is little doubt that the prospect of large-scale investment is welcomed by many in 
Asia, where there is an estimated $800 billion annual shortfall compared with infrastructure needs.
244
 
To date, more than 30 Asian countries have committed to supporting the AIIB.
245
 
China has already invested in several infrastructure projects along the Belt and Road routes, entering 
into partnerships with the countries in question. These partnerships are mainly driven by economic 
interests and are not always tempered by political realities. Mineral-rich Afghanistan, where China 
wants to invest in a railway connecting Xinjiang and Kabul among other infrastructure projects, has, 
for example, been promised $100 million in grants until 2017 .
246
 It is unclear how this project could 
be implemented given the deteriorating security situation in the country, with Chinese companies 
operating there having faced attacks and kidnappings.
247 
While China may have the financial means to 
implement large-scale infrastructure projects, this does not guarantee a political and social context or 
security environment conducive to this. 
The Belt and Road could be an opportunity for China to work with its international partners to 
promote green development and ecological civilization. The Action Plan for One Belt, One Road, 
published in March 2015, states that ‘efforts should be made to promote green and low-carbon 
infrastructure construction and operation management, taking into full account the impact of climate 
change on the construction’. A portion of China’s investment in Pakistan will go towards building more 
efficient coal-fired power plants and developing coal mining projects. Moreover, the regions covered 
by the Belt and Road initiative are ecologically diverse and face considerable water-scarcity issues; 
the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor is a good example of these risks.
248
 In short, China will need 
to ensure that the potential negative environmental effects of large construction and energy projects 
implemented as part of the Belt and Road initiative are carefully assessed and avoided. 
5.4 Partners and peers
As the above discussion shows, China will need to collaborate with other states on global resource 
governance to build consensus and minimize the risk of aggravating flashpoints. Notwithstanding 
concerns surrounding its rise, China is well positioned to forge alliances on global resource 
governance. It has a wide sphere of influence: among developing countries as a result of increasing 
trade and investment, its history with the G77 and its own development success; with emerging 
economies among which it already plays an active role; and with developed countries as the second-

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
45 
largest economy in the world and the ‘rising power’. Below, we consider some of the opportunities for 
collaboration on global resource governance.
5.4.1 Emerging economies
In recent years China has repeatedly aligned with its emerging economy peers in global governance 
negotiations. This can be seen in the formation of the BASIC group of countries at the Copenhagen 
Climate Summit, and the establishment of the BRICS and the associated NDB. While there is little 
consensus on the specifics of a future BRICS agenda, this is likely to remain focused on reforming 
existing global governance institutions and establishing complementary ones.
249
 
As the world’s economic centre of gravity continues to shift away from the West, alignment 
among the BRICS economies could present an increasingly formidable prospect in geopolitics. 
However, it would be wrong to assume that Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa can easily 
form a coherent bloc where resources are concerned. They are far from homogeneous and present 
a diversity of imports and exports across different resource classes. For example, as major resource 
producers, Russia, Brazil and South Africa will generally suffer from lower prices while India and 
China, as major consumers, broadly benefit. Consequently, on some issues their interests will diverge. 
This diversity may be a strength, as it ensures a balance of interests and guards against the pursuit of 
narrow self-interest: a coalition of producers and consumers is arguably more likely to seek equitable 
solutions than a club of either producers or consumers. On the other hand, it means that they may 
have different priorities and struggle to define a common agenda.
There could also be wider risks in China aligning exclusively with its emerging economy peers, as 
this could be perceived as indicative of its intention to upset the status quo, and play into pre-existing 
concerns in developed countries about inevitable challenges from new powers. This is not to say that 
China should not collaborate on global resource governance with other emerging economies, but that 
ambitious progress will often require a broader coalition.
In this vein, China could make further use of the G20 as a forum for established and emerging powers. 
This follows the model already used in 2010 when the G20 was used by China and its emerging 
economy peers to leverage (albeit modest and partially unrealized) reforms of the IMF and the World 
Bank.
250
 This approach recognizes the benefits of creating global governance reform under the cover 
of multilateral solidarity rather than through unilateral action. As Amrita Narlikar has put it, one of 
the big challenges for rising powers is getting the balance right: ‘Tall poppies are likely to get their 
heads cut off, and doormats are likely to get trodden over’.
251
 The use of platforms such as the G20 
helps China avoid either extreme by trading on the legitimacy of its mixed membership, including 
established and rising powers.
5.4.2 Developing countries
Developing countries could benefit from China’s role in bringing more effective global resource 
governance as many are dependent on imports of fossil fuels and are among the most exposed to 
energy and food price shocks. Taking a growing role on natural resource security and sustainability 
would also enable China to promote the interests of other developing countries through international 
processes, as it does to a greater or lesser extent on other issues.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
46 
China has presented itself as a stable development partner for resource-producing countries and 
this will be harder to sustain given falling prices. Its suppliers include 38 least developed countries 
(LDCs), which collectively exported over $50 billion worth of energy and mineral resources to China 
in 2013.
252
 For example, fossil fuels exports to China from sub-Saharan African mainly come from 
Angola, South Sudan, Nigeria, Gabon and Equatorial Guinea. All these could benefit from working 
with China on enhanced quality and governance of extractive sector investments, as well as from 
assistance in moving up the value chain.
China will also seek to work with a broader set of resource-producing countries, which are less 
important for resource security but where it can nevertheless act as a supportive development partner. 
There are many developing countries in Asia and Africa for which China is a vital current and future 
customer, even though these account for relatively small resource flows from China’s perspective, such 
as Laos, Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and Eritrea (see Annex). The ability 
of these countries to manage the development of their resource sector in future will need careful 
consideration, given their weaker institutions and capacities. 
The balance of China’s economic relations with developing countries has at times, been questioned. 
Its imports from Latin America, for example, consist mainly of unprocessed natural resources, while 
Latin America has become an increasingly important destination for its manufacturing exports.
253
 This 
imbalanced trading relationship has prompted a growing number of trade restrictions aiming to shield 
domestic industry from Chinese competition.
254
 This is recognized by China – on a recent state visit to 
Brazil to launch a $30 billion industrial fund for South American countries, Premier Li remarked that 
‘Latin America cannot always be an exporter of raw materials, like China can no longer be a global 
supplier of cheap products’.
255
 
5.4.3 Unconventional alliances 
Norms are spread more easily by coalitions of like-minded actors. As major resource importers, 
Japan, South Korea and the EU share many of the same concerns as China as far as global 
resource governance is concerned. All four stand to benefit from stable and transparent markets, 
secure trade routes, and innovation and reform for greater resource efficiency. Put another way, 
China’s competitors in an ungoverned resource market are its potential allies in shaping global 
resource governance.
Existing initiatives between the EU and China, such as the High-Level Economic and Trade Dialogue, 
and more targeted dialogues on energy security and urbanization provide forums from which to build 
cooperation around resource governance.
256
 Cooperation between China, Japan and South Korea on 
the Circular Economy Model Bases is another example.
257
 
5.4.4 The US
Given their respective positions as new and incumbent powers, cooperation between China and the 
US on global resource governance faces considerable obstacles. The IMF is one organization caught 
in this dynamic, with the 2010 agreement to expand IMF voting rights for emerging economies only 
approved by the US Congress in December 2015.
258
 Ultimately, agreement between the two could 
be the key to unlocking reform in a range of areas, not least regarding the role of emerging powers 
within the established institutions, from major multilateral bodies to the IEA.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
47 
China–US cooperation in this space is not without precedent. The joint announcement by President 
Obama and President Xi of mutual climate change commitments in late 2014 set the political 
momentum in the run-up to the Paris Climate Change Conference. Notably, these have been the only 
climate declarations to be made jointly (other governments have announced their commitments 
individually), signalling an end to a deadlock between the world’s two largest emitters and indicating 
that a global deal is politically feasible.
The question for global resource governance is whether this dynamic can be replicated more 
widely. The logic behind China–US climate cooperation – that meaningful climate governance 
requires alignment between the two largest emitters – can be extended to other areas of resource 
governance as China and the US are also the two largest resource producer-consumers. However, 
other areas of resource governance lack the political priority afforded to climate change in the run-
up to a major global summit, and may present a greater risk of igniting wider tensions (e.g. trade 
or maritime security).
5.4.5 Non-state actors
Today, there is little confidence in multilateral efforts to address global challenges. An ever 
more complex global economy and the risks of climate change have increased the importance of 
collective action, but they also make it more complicated. From the Doha round negotiations of 
the WTO (arguably stalled since the collapse of talks in Cancún in 2003, although some headway 
was made in Bali in 2013), to the failure to agree on a global climate deal in Copenhagen in 
2009, evidence of stalemate at the international level abounds. It remains to be seen whether 
the successful outcome of the Paris Climate Change Conference can restore broader confidence 
in multilateralism.
Many factors contribute to this situation, including the dispersal of power associated with the rise 
of emerging economies, domestic challenges in Europe (an economic crisis, and, more recently, a 
refugee crisis) and the US (polarized politics and fear of decline), which have further undermined 
the capacity of these established powers to spearhead the next generation of global solutions. 
Accordingly, increasing emphasis has been placed on so-called bottom-up efforts – whether from 
businesses, cities or individuals. Recent years have seen a marked increase in the engagement of 
businesses, NGOs, think-tanks, academic institutions and local government in global organizations. 
As Section 3 describes, new initiatives tend to focus on leveraging private finance, setting voluntary 
standards or facilitating knowledge exchange about best practice. There has been a corresponding 
proliferation in informal rules and norms being established and monitored by non-state actors.
This presents something of a challenge for China, which is more accustomed to formalized 
governance arrangements with binding rules, where national governments are the actors. 
China already has some of the necessary capacity among its own businesses, think-tanks, 
NGOs and universities to engage in these informal processes, but it could encourage them to 
be more active and help set the agenda. Although progress is needed in multilateral forums, 
the fact remains that most headway is currently being made by non-state actors, often working 
through unofficial channels.

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
48 
5.5 Moves and responses
This section has argued that the geopolitical shifts associated with resources and China’s rise 
present a number of challenges to the country taking on a progressive, reforming role on global 
resource governance. Nevertheless, China should play a growing role in shaping resource 
governance and creating global goods – reflecting not only its position as a major producer 
and the world’s largest consumer of resources but also its status as a new power and the 
expectations attached to this.
China’s actions will be watched closely and will have ramifications that go beyond the sphere of 
resource governance. As President Obama stated in September 2015: ‘We can’t treat China as if it’s still 
a very poor, developing country, as it might have been 50 years ago. It is now a powerhouse. And that 
means it’s got responsibilities and expectations in terms of helping to uphold international rules that 
might not have existed before. And that is something China should welcome’.
259
China will aim to take a careful approach that is mindful of pre-existing concerns and tensions. 
This may mean avoiding sensitive issues in the first instance and focusing on areas where there are 
obvious opportunities to build trust. It will also have to seek to work collaboratively with other states, 
and ensure the capacity of its non-state actors to engage in informal governance initiatives and 
collaborate with foreign counterparts as appropriate. Finally, China can demonstrate its leadership 
credentials by maintaining high standards of social and environmental performance – through its 
banks and companies as well as any institutions it is involved in creating.
But the onus cannot be on China alone. Commensurable efforts are required from other countries – 
to collaborate with China where appropriate, but more fundamentally to provide it with the 
opportunity to ‘build from within’ existing institutions. This essentially means welcoming China 
to the table rather than seeking to limit its influence, and setting the ‘price of entry’ into existing 
institutions – whether in terms of the burden of responsibilities it takes on, the reforms it makes or 
the principles it adopts – at a level that is not prohibitive for China, but that does not undermine 
the efficacy of the current system either.
Failing to provide this opportunity would leave China on the margins of decision-making and 
outside some institutions altogether. This would be untenable in the long term. Governance 
arrangements that do not fully include a major producer and the world’s largest consumer and trader 
of resources could only be considered partial at best – and certainly not global. It would also deny 
China the chance to pursue its objectives through the existing system, potentially pushing it towards 
building an alternative one – an outcome both the US and EU, for example, are keen to avoid.
The importance of other emerging economies as major resource producers and consumers means 
this argument is not restricted to China. Indeed, China’s experience of taking a growing role in 
global resource governance would set a precedent. Other emerging economies would be likely to 
follow, and the way that China is brought into existing institutions and granted new rights will set 
the tone for them. In this sense, while all rising powers face a similar challenge in negotiating more 
favourable terms for themselves in an order in which they are not yet dominant, resources are one 
area in which the established powers may need the cooperation of the rising powers, and China 
in particular.

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
49 
5.6 Costs and benefits
Table 1 sets out some of the benefits, risks and key uncertainties associated with China taking a 
more active role in global resource governance. Here the focus is on the geopolitical and strategic 
implications of a growing role for China, building on all the analysis in this section. In some cases the 
table also refers to key recommendations discussed in Section 4 – for example, ‘secure and resilient 
resource flows’ considers the opportunities and risks associated with joining the IEA. 
Table 1: Benefits, costs and uncertainties 
Benefits/opportunities Costs/risks Key uncertainties
Efficient, rules-based global markets
Managing evolving risks. 
China’ s integration in global 
economy and shift up the value chain 
means growing interest in enhanced 
cooperation.
Area of influence. China’s unique role in 
global resource trade, and in particular 
its share of metals trade, means it is 
well placed to play a growing role in 
this area.
Lower prices. There is an opportunity 
to advance conversations about 
appropriate regulation while the 
pressure on global markets is reduced.
Information sharing. Political and 
commercial challenges around sharing 
of data, especially around trade and 
stockpiles of strategic energy sources 
and minerals.
Regulatory alignment. Would mean 
helping to initiate complex negotiations 
over alignment of national regulators – 
technically and politically difficult.
Political capital. Investment in 
WTO, UNCLOS and other multilateral 
processes clearly unlikely to result 
in quick wins, could be very slow 
progress.
Perception. China has been accused 
of manipulating markets in the past – 
very important to get communications 
right on any new initiative around 
markets and regulations.
Shifting politics. Price swings 
in resource markets have redrawn the 
political map of resources in recent 
months – the fallout is still ongoing.
Does the political will exist given lower 
prices? For food, prices remain high. 
Other resources are at levels still well 
above pre-boom levels. Yet there is a 
risk that other issues take precedence 
over resources in the short term, and 
thus that key strategic opportunities are 
missed.
Future dislocations. Fears of 
resource scarcity are likely to return 
in the medium term, given geological 
and environmental constraints and 
demographic shifts. This could quickly 
translate into geopolitical tensions and 
narrow, zero-sum responses.
Secure and resilient resource flows
Seat at the table. Greater influence over 
level of public good provided by the 
regime – important for China since oil 
security is a significant risk to future 
growth prospects.
Maintaining resilience of international 
system. Status quo risks rendering 
current oil security mechanism 
increasingly less effective due to rising 
share of non-OECD consumption.
Development partner. China’s 
participation in oil security 
mechanisms would benefit poorer 
developing countries in Asia through 
enhanced oil security. It would also 
pave way for others to join IEA.
Appropriate burden sharing. China’s 
leaders recognize need for the country 
to contribute more to global public 
goods in energy and maritime security.
Geopolitical tensions. Greater 
involvement in maritime security 
to protect energy flows could raise 
tensions with other countries. 
A new regional organization could 
be seen as rival to IEA rather than 
complementary if not well managed.
Impact on key energy partnerships. 
Joining the IEA could give the 
impression that China is shifting away 
from neutral position in consumer–
producer dialogues, affecting 
relations with the likes of the Gulf 
countries, Russia, Angola, Venezuela 
and Kazakhstan.
Additional cost burden. Costs 
and inflexibility of meeting the 
IEA’s 90-day oil storage requirement. 
Costs of investment in maritime 
security.
Common principles and rules. 
Enhanced transparency requirements 
for participation in the IEA; alignment 
of crisis response communications; 
or common military protocols, 
e.g. for anti-piracy operations.
Geopolitical situation. Building joint 
efforts on energy security will obviously 
be more difficult if there are heightened 
tensions with potential partner 
countries.
US–Chinese relations. US endgame 
on China and IEA is unclear, and 
political urgency is reduced due to 
shale oil and lower price environment.
Flexibility of existing organizations. For 
example, treaty change to allow non-
OECD countries to join IEA; or allowing 
China to ratchet up to 90-day level.
Data and projections. Imperfect energy 
data in China. Uncertainty over future 
oil demand profile due to structural 
transition. Potential for technology 
breakthroughs.
Infrastructure. Supply-side uncertainties 
include pipeline development to Russia 
and via Silk Roads overland route, and 
new import terminals.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
50 
Benefits/opportunities Costs/risks Key uncertainties
Open and improved investment
Licence to operate. Adopting 
international recognized practices 
for risk management would lead 
to better relations with producer 
countries and domestic populations in 
long term.
Reputational benefits. Upgrading 
investment practices would 
underscore China’s commitment 
to ecological civilization and low- 
carbon transition, helping reinforce 
partnerships with partner countries.
Commercial viability. Improved risk 
management approaches should lead 
to enhanced commercial performance, 
helping to build a group of China- 
headquartered multinational firms.
Lower transaction costs. Common 
sets of rules and mechanisms e.g. 
under Energy Charter Treaty could be 
attractive to China, allowing common 
basis for negotiation and agreements, 
and binding non-WTO countries along 
the Belt and Road.
Diplomatic effort. Improving China’s 
reputation overseas in resources 
markets will take time and significant 
diplomatic investment, as well as 
improved commercial/risk practices.
Commercial impact. In the short term, 
clearer and stronger rules around 
investment could restrict the scope 
and operation of some Chinese firms 
overseas – especially where ‘no-go’ 
decisions are taken.
Partnerships. Some partner countries 
may resent additional risk guidance for 
Chinese firms beyond their national 
frameworks, although most are used 
to working with World Bank etc. Some 
countries see EITI as unnecessary and 
irrelevant so may react negatively to 
China joining.
China-relevant approach. China 
has developed its own voluntary 
approaches to improving investment. 
How should these be aligned with 
existing standards and vice versa?
Working with BRICS. Can China 
persuade other developing and 
emerging economies to adopt 
consistent set of rules e.g. under the 
NDB and AIIB? Would other countries 
join ECT after China, such as Indonesia?
Impact of lower prices. Political fallout 
of lower price situation has led to 
growing tensions in many resource- 
exporting countries. These are likely 
to affect their attitudes to overseas 
investors and operators, including by 
Chinese firms.
Investment profile and destinations. 
How fast will China’s overseas 
investment shift away from resource 
investments into infrastructure, 
services, technology and other sectors? 
What will be the geographical mix?
Innovation and reform in the new normal
Capitalizing on soft power 
opportunities. China’s experiences of 
price reform, efficiency policy and the 
circular economy, and its links with 
several countries on resources, are 
an underused soft power resource, 
including in multilateral processes.
Influencing global market rules. 
For example, domestic action on 
listing rules will have a global reach, 
as capital markets become deeper 
and more liquid.
Opportunities for Chinese firms. New 
policy areas could help Chinese firms 
to ‘drive change down’ the value chain, 
through for example supply chain 
standards or technology cooperation 
with supplier firms.
New global markets. Catalyzing global 
action on the circular economy 
would create huge opportunities 
for China’s heavy industry and 
manufacturing sectors.
Competing priorities. Policy-makers 
are focused on tackling ‘deep-seated 
problems’ exposed by the global 
slowdown, which have built up over 
many years. It is important to explain 
the short- and longer-term benefits 
of enhanced resource governance in 
this context.
New policy risks. Greater use of market- 
based and financial levers will require 
learning by doing, and in some cases 
piloting and experimentation.
Alignment and coordination challenges. 
Integrating domestic and foreign policy 
approaches to resource governance 
would reduce costs and predictability 
and facilitate the internationalization 
of Chinese firms, but will be difficult to 
implement.
Perception. China is a leader in 
efficiency, but it is in the process 
of dealing with huge ecological 
challenges and many areas of reform 
are unfinished. Communicating this 
message is challenging, although it 
may be a story other countries can 
relate to.
The state of the new normal. How 
quickly the new normal will settle down 
after the current period of economic 
volatility and uncertainty.
Who should take the lead? Assigning 
responsibility for resource governance 
is difficult due to competing interests 
and overlapping responsibilities.
New partnerships. Policy 
development in new areas will provide 
new opportunities for partnerships, but 
which countries should China prioritize?
Trade politics. Progress in some key 
areas will depend on global conditions 
and relations with key partner countries, 
e.g. difficult to negotiate circular 
economy strategy with EU if there are 
ongoing battles in other areas.
Data and projections. Uncertainty over 
future resource demand profile due to 
ongoing industrial structural transition.

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
51 
6. Recommendations for China and the 
international community 
This section outlines recommendations for China’s government, for consideration in the 13th Five-
Year Plan process, and for its international partners. It summarizes the rationale for enhanced 
engagement on global resources governance, identifies the strategic-level priorities for China and the 
international community, and makes a number of policy-level recommendations that can help further 
progress toward them. 
As earlier sections have explained, China’s choices will to a large extent define the landscape of 
cooperative efforts on natural resources in the next five to 10 years. If China invests in cooperative 
approaches and multilateral solutions that are in line with its resource and development needs, these 
initiatives will stand a good chance of success – because of China’s central importance in resources 
markets; because it has or is capable of developing the institutional, economic and political capacities 
necessary to implement and enforce these arrangements; and because other developing countries will 
look to it for leadership.
On the other hand, if China chooses to step back from cooperative approaches this will change the 
cost-benefit calculations of other players, and is likely to lead to a further erosion of the rules-based 
system as it applies to resources. While the rise of new powers into an order that was established to 
reflect the interests of old powers might present opportunities for conflict, there is no need for this to 
be the case. Moreover China is not alone in these challenges; other rising powers are grappling with 
similar questions and will look to China for leadership in this area.
Box 8: Five key principles for global resource governance
The strategic and policy-level recommendations in this section reflect five key principles for global 
resource governance that were developed by Chatham House and the DRC, in collaboration with a 
variety of stakeholders in global resource governance: 
• Open competition and more stable markets: It is in the interests of resource importers and 
exporters to make steps towards reduced government intervention in energy and resource 
markets; to improve the efficiency of resource allocation; and to increase global competition and 
reduce distortions to prevent excessive volatility and market manipulation.
• Consensus-led and broad representation of actors: A key issue for the legitimacy of governance 
arrangements, but also for effective responses. Participants in global resource market 
governance should include developed and emerging economies, resource exporters and 
importers, businesses, international organizations and expert bodies. ‘Coalitions of the willing’ 
can be a starting point for catalysing action, but should be broadened over time to maintain 
effectiveness and legitimacy.

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
52 
• Dialogue and win-win solutions: As with any cooperative activity, all parties will need to perceive 
a benefit from participation in global resource governance arrangements, or at least a low cost of 
participation with some hope of future gains or political leadership. Zero-sum outcomes where 
one party benefits at the expense of another should be avoided, and trade and investment disputes 
should be carefully managed to jointly maintain a fair and stable market environment. 
• Pragmatic approaches: Given the complexity of global markets, the competing interests of 
many actors and the range of existing institutions, a unified approach under a formal ‘resources 
organization’ is unlikely to succeed. Global resource governance will remain a patchwork and 
policy-makers need to focus on addressing key problems and improving key institutions to 
succeed in the long term.
• Sustainability: Given the growing threats from climate change, environmental degradation, water 
scarcity and rises in sea levels, a key challenge for global resource governance is how to overcome 
inertia and avoid locking in failures that will undermine long-term growth. It must also address the 
underlying causes of risks posed by unsustainable resource production methods, infrastructure 
and consumption patterns. It should work to capture the benefits of resource-efficient technologies 
and new business models.
6.1 Navigating the geopolitics of resources and governance reform
Interdependence can provide opportunities for strategic choices – particularly in terms of engagement 
with multilateral institutions – that may make harmony more likely than discord. But as Hugh White 
has put it: ‘Interdependence increases the incentive for leaders to subordinate political ambitions 
and ignore nationalist sentiments, but it does not remove the need for them to take these bold and 
politically risky steps. The hard choices still have to be made.’
260 
A central message of this report is that global resource governance is at a pivotal moment and that 
China’s choices in this area, more than those of any other actor, are likely to shape the framework 
and norms that are set in place for the foreseeable future. Across all the issues discussed in this 
report, the outcome for the management of global public goods will depend not only on choices 
made by China but also on the actions, reactions and approaches of other countries, from the extent 
to which they seek to block, frustrate or alternatively work with China, to how flexible they are in 
seeking collaborative solutions. 
This raises fundamental questions about how other existing powers see relations with China. Are they 
ready to welcome China to the table, once practical solutions and dialogues bear fruit and if it is able 
to accept the rules of the game? Or do they ultimately see their core interests in limiting the influence 
of China in resources issues due to perceived national security or competitiveness concerns – even 
if global goods are undermined as a result? Of course, some of these questions touch upon the core 
foreign policy interests and principles of China and its international partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
53 
A sensible goal would be to find a recipe for reform that is sufficient to encourage or enable China to 
join without risking undermining the most important characteristics and values of the current system. 
Getting this right will have broader benefits, as the way that China is brought into the system may set 
the tone for how other emerging economies will be treated.
One side of this equation is how to set a fair ‘price of entry’ for China into organizations – in terms 
of the level of responsibility it will take on or the principles and processes it must adopt being 
within acceptable bounds for Chinese officials. For example, China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs has 
conducted an assessment of the EITI and approved its principles, but the initiative’s mechanism is 
perceived as being in conflict with China’s foreign policy principle of non-interference.
261
The other is the willingness of existing organizations to be flexible and innovative. Being more 
flexible and active in engaging with China would also enhance the credibility of other countries when 
they make criticisms of China’s position or actions related to natural resources, or when they argue 
that China is not pulling its weight, or is not willing to compromise. The US accusation of ‘constant 
accommodation of China’ levelled at the UK when it applied to join the AIIB, for example, increased 
the perception that any role for China is unwelcome.
In return, China can assume a more active role in resource diplomacy, contributing to a more dynamic 
and inclusive form of governance. First, its resource diplomacy and trade and economic cooperation 
should support poorer countries and grant them a stronger voice on international resources issues. It 
could actively coordinate country groupings on energy and natural resource cooperation mechanisms, 
working together to promote benign interaction and enhance collective capacity to participate in 
global resource governance. Second, China can act as a bridge between industrialized and developing 
economies, working with others to ensure an open international resource system. Chatham House 
has, for example, previously called for sustained but informal dialogues focused on resources markets 
between 30 key countries (the ‘R30’).
262
 
Addressing the existing governance regime’s shortcomings may require new organizations, mechanisms 
and processes. From a global resource governance perspective, there is nothing inherently negative 
about these being led or initiated by China. China can play a valuable role, filling existing policy gaps, 
helping to meet the need for investment, and broadening participation to a wider range of countries. The 
extent to which Chinese-led and other parallel approaches align and cooperate with existing governance 
institutions is the key question; there is a risk of friction where new initiatives are seen as rivals to – 
rather than complementary to and aligned with – existing organizations, rules and norms. Making use of 
existing platforms such as the G20 to help transform the global resource landscape would demonstrate 
China’s recognition of the benefits of creating global governance reform under the rubric of multilateral 
solidarity rather than unilateral action. 
The literature on the role of international institutions in facilitating cooperation between states 
suggests that states have an enhanced ability to signal their intentions when they are deeply involved 
in the dominant global institutions rather than on the sidelines (or more involved in alternative 
institutions).
263
 This applies to China as well as its international partners. It will be easier to avoid 
misperceptions and miscalculations on sensitive issues if Chinese officials or other representatives 
are at the table.

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
54 
6.2 Policy-level recommendations 
This subsection sets out a series of policy-level recommendations that follow on from the strategic-
level recommendations above, and the four areas of global resource governance that were identified 
in Section 4. In general, these recommendations are aimed at Chinese decision-makers, but most 
if not all require close collaboration with other countries and with international organizations 
if they are to be successfully implemented. The table at the end of the section summarizes these 
options and presents them as ‘quick wins’ and longer-term objectives for the 13th Five-Year Plan 
and beyond. 
6.2.1 Efficient, rules-based global markets 
Enhance collaboration and regulatory reform in global resource markets 
China should convene a high-level informal forum on minerals markets,
264
 capitalizing on its unique 
position in metals markets, in order to facilitate ongoing dialogues and also common solutions, 
where possible. Forum participants could for example: examine different approaches to regulation of 
physical and paper markets in key countries; share information on investigations where appropriate; 
discuss the evolution of China’s commodities exchanges and international experience; and examine 
the options for different pricing regimes. 
Explore practical options for improved dialogues and information
Under the high-level informal forum on minerals markets or separately, China could propose a 
regular ‘global metals and minerals report’, co-produced by national agencies in producer and 
consumer countries, setting out key statistics for the production, consumption and trade in minerals 
and assessing key themes, along the lines of the IEA’s World Energy Outlook. 
China should also explore opportunities to avoid damaging export restrictions through win-win 
arrangements with producer countries at government-to-government level. China could offer incentives 
such as investment packages or technology sharing in return for producer countries’ refraining from 
imposing restrictions. 
China could also work with developed and emerging economies to develop enhanced mechanisms 
for ‘early warning’ of possible trade disputes over natural resources, in order to identify and manage 
tensions arising from resources markets. 
Take the long view in multilateral negotiations towards more comprehensive solutions
China should seek to work with other major economies to unblock negotiations and build 
momentum in key multilateral forums, even though there is little prospect of rapid progress on 
resource-specific issues. The WTO remains the key venue for trade negotiations, while UNCLOS 
plays an equally important role for maritime security and jurisdiction issues.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
55 
6.2.2 Secure and resilient resource flows
Promote the reform of global energy governance 
China should consider joining the IEA but this would need to be in parallel with IEA reforms. There 
has been considerable work towards cooperation on technical and data matters, but comparatively 
less focus on resolving the major political barriers to greater participation. The question of China and 
other associate member countries formally joining the IEA should be further explored. In addition 
to resolving the question of ‘treaty change’, moving the headquarters of the IEA to an Asian country 
(such as Singapore or South Korea) would send a strong signal. 
Enhance global and regional energy security mechanisms 
In the short term, China could seek to accelerate agreement of mutually acceptable common 
communication and response protocols between the BRICS and the IEA, building on recent joint exercises 
and data sharing. 
China should work towards a regional agreement to manage energy security risks in oil and gas import-
dependent countries and support more vulnerable countries, in collaboration with South Korea, 
Japan, India and ASEAN (which already has a petroleum supply agreement). This could later be 
expanded to renewables, nuclear and electricity market security.
Between BRICS countries and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), for example, an energy 
transaction database could be established, and options for an energy crisis early-warning mechanism 
and emergency response mechanism could be explored. In general, China should seek to expand 
channels of multilateral corporation for BRICS and the SCO, with the aim of multi-level governance 
through broad participation.
China could also encourage national oil companies in the Middle East to develop oil storage in China 
and other Asian countries, as they do in South Korea and Japan; this is a relatively low-cost way to 
strengthen Asian oil security.
265
 
Contribute to the security and sustainability of shipping routes 
China should take advantage of opportunities for enhanced cooperation and alignment with the Combined 
Maritime Forces to tackle piracy and secure shipping routes. Current joint exercises could be used as a 
starting point for closer cooperation and capacity-building. 
6.2.3 Open and improved investment 
Improve dialogue and information around China’s overseas investments 
Consider joining the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) or other processes to encourage 
transparency. Greater cooperation with the EITI and relevant in-country stakeholders would help 
Chinese companies build capacity and work with partners on implementation, which may enable 
Chinese companies to demonstrate best practice in producer countries and help safeguard the ‘social 
licence’ to operate. Many Chinese companies are already following EITI rules in countries that have 
adopted the framework.
266

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
56 
Enhanced environmental monitoring and reporting is critical in order to establish baselines and 
track environmental change internationally, including in partner countries along the Belt and 
Road. Better information is also needed as part of a broader strategy to ensure that international 
narratives regarding China and natural resources are accurate. A more proactive strategy led 
by China’s diplomats and experts could include regularly publishing details on China’s overseas 
activities; being more open about problems and how they are being addressed; and expanding 
dialogues with non-state actors. 
Develop common standards in conjunction with international partners 
Policy-makers in China should establish an international benchmarking exercise for China’s 
investment frameworks and guidelines. This would clarify how existing Chinese environmental, 
social and governance standards and compliance processes compare with international norms 
and guidelines – at project level and along supply chains (including the Equator Principles, IFC 
Performance Standards and OECD due diligence guidelines). Where relevant it would identify 
specific areas where enhanced alignment is possible and desirable, and the role of Chinese 
agencies and new organizations such as the AIIB. 
Chinese organizations should draw on international experience to leapfrog up the learning 
curve on overseas investment. Chinese firms could expand informal dialogues with major 
multinational companies, and include firms from other emerging economies that are developing 
overseas capacities. 
In some cases natural resource projects pose unacceptably high risks from a political, technical 
or socio-environmental standpoint. China could demonstrate its commitment to sustainable 
development by working towards principles for ‘no-go’ activities and areas, working with other major 
economies and resource producers. Establishing such principles (e.g. via the G20) could make a key 
contribution to global environmental protection while avoiding risks to China’s reputation. 
Develop governance and financial tools that reduce the risks associated with resource-related investments 
China could show leadership with an instrument to facilitate the scaling up of regional and 
bilateral investments, with incentives for green projects. Like the World Bank’s Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA), it could address political risk and sustainability challenges of large-scale 
investment in resources and infrastructure. It could work with the Silk Road Fund, AIIB and BRICS 
bank, providing discounted premiums for excellent environmental and social performance. 
China should also consider joining the Energy Charter Treaty, which could provide a low cost means 
to mitigate overseas investment risks in resources and infrastructure and develop a common set of 
rules with dispute resolution mechanisms.
267 
The benefits to China outweigh the risks of joining, given 
the balance of China’s outward to inward investments.
268
 The short-term benefits apply primarily 
to investments in Central and Eastern European countries (especially for non-WTO members), 
but China could also encourage resource partners such as Indonesia to join.

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
57 
6.2.4 Fostering innovation and reform 
Formulate and implement a strategy on resource security under the 13th Five-Year Plan
 A new strategy for China’s engagement in global resources governance should be established under 
the 13FYP. Aligning China’s domestic and international agendas on resources makes sense, given the 
launch of the Belt and Road initiative and China’s increasing role in global governance. China could 
play a more active role in global resource governance through the mobilization of domestic actors 
such as relevant ministries, think-tanks, enterprises, industry associations and NGOs. This could work 
best where domestic actors have particular technical or policy-making expertise, although significant 
investment in institutional capacity building would still be required. 
Oversight of China’s strategy for engagement in global resources governance would need to be led 
by new inter-ministerial arrangements. Central government should coordinate activity in different 
departments on international resource issues to enhance efficiency, address complex risks and present 
a coherent approach overseas. 
Take advantage of new policy options towards 2020 
As Chinese companies are increasingly focused on higher value-added, non-extractive activities, they 
will have growing opportunities to ‘drive change down’ the value chain, for example through supply 
chain standards or technology cooperation with supplier firms. 
The size of China’s markets means that domestic regulations could contribute to change in overseas 
markets. In the 13FYP period, China could enhance listing and reporting requirements for quoted 
companies as capital markets become deeper and more liquid, or market access regulations, in line 
with emerging standards in other countries.
Turn China’s new normal into a window of opportunity
China should use its G20 chair in 2016 to promote global resource governance. A number of initiatives 
from phasing out fossil fuel subsidies to enhanced coordination around energy data have already been 
established under the G20. China should build upon this momentum and take the lead in developing 
a coherent agenda for global resource governance, in partnership with Germany and India, the next 
two chairs of the G20. Possible topics could include the peaking and phasing out of coal, in light of 
national circumstances, and energy and resource pricing. China could also utilize the G20 platform for 
a number of ‘quick wins’ (see Table 2). In soft power terms, this would allow China to demonstrate its 
commitment to ongoing market reforms and ecological civilization at home and abroad. 
China should continue to upgrade its circular economy strategy within the 13FYP and seek international 
opportunities to promote this agenda. China is already a leader in the circular economy in terms of scale 
of efficiency savings, but it is still developing advanced technological capacities. This is an area where 
China could aim to be the global leader by 2020–25. In the short to medium term, the goal should be 
to align standards on the circular economy and build global markets for circular economy products, 
working with major markets and regional partners that are accelerating action in this area, including 
the EU, South Korea and Japan.

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
58 
Table 2: Summary of recommendations for China and the international community, 
and likely timeframes 
‘Quick win’ 2020 2025
Efficient, rules-based global markets
Enhance collaboration and regulatory reform in global resource markets 
• Convene a high level informal forum on minerals markets to 
facilitate ongoing dialogues and promote common solutions •
Explore practical options for improved dialogues and information 
• Propose a ‘global metals and minerals report’ •
• Avoid damaging export restrictions through win-win 
arrangements 
•
• ‘Early warning’ of trade-related measures to identify and 
manage tensions
•
Take the long view in multilateral negotiations towards more 
comprehensive solutions 
• Work with other emerging economies to unblock negotiations 
and build momentum 
•
Secure and resilient resource flows
Promote the reform of global energy governance 
• China should consider joining the IEA (in tandem with 
IEA reforms) • •
Enhance global and regional energy security mechanisms
• Accelerate agreement of mutually acceptable common 
communication and response protocols between the BRICS 
and the IEA
• •
• Work towards a regional agreement to manage energy security 
in collaboration with South Korea, Japan, India and ASEAN 
•
• Consider establishing an energy transaction database between 
BRICS countries and the SCO, for example, and explore energy 
crisis early-warning and an emergency response mechanisms
•
• Encourage MENA NOCs to develop oil storage in China and 
other Asian countries
•
Contribute to the security and sustainability of shipping routes
• Consider opportunities for enhanced cooperation and 
alignment with the Combined Maritime Forces
• •
Open and improved investment 
Improve dialogue and information around China’s overseas investments 
• Consider joining the EITI to demonstrate best practice and build 
capacity • •
• Publish information and expand dialogues with non-state 
actors re. China’s overseas activities
•
Develop common standards in conjunction with international partners 
• Benchmark China’s investment frameworks against 
international best practice 
•
• Draw on international experience to leapfrog up the learning 
curve 
•
• Collaborate with other major economies at the G20 on ‘no-go’ 
activities, e.g. principles for non-acceptable exploration
•
Develop governance and financial tools that reduce the risks associated 
with resource-related investments 
• Develop ESG-led finance instruments under the AIIB and others
• Consider joining the Energy Charter Treaty 
•

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
59 
‘Quick win’ 2020 2025
Fostering innovation and reform 
Formulate and implement a strategy on resource security under the 
13th Five-Year Plan
• Establish a new strategy for China’s engagement in global 
resources governance 
•
• Make new inter-ministerial arrangements to coordinate activity 
in different departments on international resource issues
•
Take advantage of new policy options towards 2020
• ‘Drive change down’ the value chain through supply chain 
standards or technology cooperation, for example
•
• Leverage domestic regulations to contribute to change in 
overseas markets, e.g. leading the way on listing requirements
•
Turn China’s ‘new normal’ into a window of opportunity
• China could use its G20 chair in 2016 to promote a coherent 
global resource governance agenda 
•
• Continue to prioritize the circular economy within the 13FYP 
and seek international opportunities to promote this agenda
•

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
60 
7 . Conclusions
China and global resource markets have both entered a period of rapid, structural realignment. In 
global commodity markets a decade-long demand and investment boom is giving way to deflationary 
dynamics and a sharp contraction in global investment. In China, the successful growth model that 
has propelled the rapid industrialization and urbanization of the world’s most populous nation is 
reaching its limits. Three decades after beginning successful reform and opening up, China faces the 
challenge of transitioning to a more measured, consumption-led, and more sustainable growth model.
These phenomena are closely intertwined. The accelerating urbanization and industrialization of China and 
other emerging economies were major drivers of the commodities super cycle of the past decade and China’s 
shifting consumption pattern is a key contributor to falling prices today. Over the same time, mounting 
import dependence and the debilitating environmental consequences of unfettered resource consumption 
growth in China began to highlight the limitations of an investment-focused development model.
The speed and scale of the economic realignments have taken most experts and policy-makers by 
surprise, but it is already clear that the ramifications reach far beyond the confines of the Chinese 
economy or global commodity markets. While the situation remains fluid and the shape of the new 
equilibrium, both in China and global resource markets, is still difficult to predict, there is nonetheless 
an urgent need to assess the implications of these shifts for policy-makers, in China and globally.
Not everything changes with China’s new normal. Underlying environmental pressures continue to 
build at local level, such as water scarcity, land degradation and pollution, and these risks will be 
further amplified by climate change. Meanwhile, at global level the next two decades will see 1 billion 
people added to the global middle class, and hundreds of millions of people will gain access to modern 
energy and water services. It remains a huge challenge to ensure that sufficient and sustainable 
investments are channelled into sustainable resource production in coming decades.
Clearly, the politics of resources have shifted in the past two years, along with the immediate priorities 
of policy-makers. During the resource boom, policy-makers and businesses in consumer countries 
focused on the risks posed by resource nationalism in producer countries, the accompanying rise 
in investment disputes, and the proliferation of export restrictions. Today, producer countries are 
under economic pressure from falling revenues and investments. The policy debate is shifting to 
diversification and cost-cutting, as well as the risk of ‘stranded assets’.
China’s role on the international stage is also beginning to take shape. New resource realities will 
provide the backdrop for its emergence and for the shape of its relations with resource-producing 
countries. Resource security and sustainability issues have been a focal point in narratives about China 
over the past decade. How China responds to the challenges, working with others, will help define 
China’s reputation as a responsible actor on the world stage in the next decade.
In global resource governance, the drop in prices and investment is taking the pressure off the heated 
politics around natural resources that have characterized the last decade. In this context, policy-makers 
in China and around the world should see the price deflation and slowing demand growth in China as 
an opportunity for accelerated reform, both in China and in global resource governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
61 
Annex: China’s resource 
interdependencies 
China’s growing reliance on overseas natural resources has created an expanding web of trade 
relations over the past decade, tying the fortunes of resource-reliant economies and China’s economic 
development ever more closely together. These interdependencies are reshaping interests, politics, 
and diplomacy – not only in China, but among resource exporting nations, and other major importing 
countries. This section analyses these evolving patterns with the help of the Chatham House Resource 
Trade Database, which tracks resource trade disaggregated by individual commodities at the regional 
and bilateral level. It starts by viewing China’s interdependencies across all resources (including 
agricultural and forestry resources), before focusing on fossil fuel and metals and mineral resources. 
China has sought to invest in the resource sector and to build and strengthen economic and 
political partnerships with a number of key regions. In 2014, China’s neighbours in Asia and the 
Caucasus (including Russia) accounted for 22 per cent of resource imports in value terms. However, 
their importance has been declining relative to five overseas regions that collectively supply around 
two-thirds of China’s resource imports: the Middle East and North Africa (20 per cent), South America 
(14 per cent), Oceania (13 per cent), sub-Saharan Africa (10 per cent), and North America (8 per cent) 
(see Figure 11). The nature of the challenges China confronts as it seeks to expand resource-related 
trade and investments varies significantly from region to region.
Figure 1 1: China’s imports of natural resources by region of origin, 2000–14, billion USD
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 
USD (billion) 
Caribbean and Central America 
South Asia 
Europe 
China 
South East Asia 
Central and Northern Asia 
North America 
East Asia 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Oceania 
South America 
MENA 
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE (2015).
Note: Data for mainland China; imports from China region denote intraregional flows from Hong Kong and Macau.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
62 
China’s resource interdependencies by region 
Exports from China’s neighbours in Asia and the Caucasus consist broadly of two groups: higher-
value, processed products from more advanced economies and raw materials from less advanced 
economies in the region. There is in theory great potential for expanding mutually beneficial resource 
trade in the region, but this would require overcoming significant challenges. Political tensions and 
concerns have been a key factor in shaping trade and investment in the region, with some countries 
trying to limit their dependence on their powerful neighbour.
269
 The lack of infrastructure to transport 
large quantities of resources into China from its northern, southern and western neighbours is another 
major constraint on regional resource trade.
To overcome these challenges, China has invested heavily in bilateral diplomacy and cross-border 
infrastructure in recent years. China has established ‘strategic partnerships’ with at least 20 Asian 
countries, including most of its major resource suppliers in the region. China has also made extensive 
investments in cross-border pipelines and ambitious rail and road projects. More recently, under President 
Xi, China has begun to complement bilateral diplomacy with a host of regional initiatives, which also feed 
into infrastructural investments. The most ambitious of these is the Belt and Road initiative: a composite 
of the Silk Road Economic Belt, linking the Eurasian continent, Europe and East Asia through a network 
of overland infrastructure and logistical hubs, and the Maritime Silk Road, its naval equivalent, which will 
connect China with Europe via ports along South and South East Asia, Africa and the Middle East. 
These proposals are backed by a range of new Chinese-led regional funding mechanisms, which 
include the Asian Infrastructure and Investment Bank (AIIB) and the Chinese Silk Road Fund.
270
 
Although the prospect of large-scale investment is welcomed by many in the region, concerns 
remain among several of China’s neighbours, most notably India and Indonesia. Natural resource 
trade is only one component in China’s rapidly developing and ambitious bilateral and regional 
diplomacy. Both Silk Road initiatives, for example, are aimed at cultural exchange as well as broad 
economic development across the region. Trade and investment in the resource sector are, however, 
likely to remain among the principal vectors in China’s engagement with many of its resource-rich 
neighbours, and in regional diplomacy more broadly. 
China’s expanding trade links with its neighbours have been overshadowed in recent years by the 
much faster growth in imports from five key overseas resource-producing regions. In 2014, these five 
regions accounted for around 65 per cent of China’s resource imports in value terms.
Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
The Middle East and North Africa (MENA) is now the most important overseas source of natural 
resources to China. China currently depends on the Middle East for approximately one third of the oil 
it consumes.
271
 Political instability in the region is perhaps the single most important risk for China’s 
resource security. In order to secure its long-term and growing resource interests in the region, China 
has worked hard to strengthen bilateral ties with key producer countries, establishing strategic 
partnerships with key oil and gas producers.
272
 However, conflicts in Libya and Iraq have resulted 
in disruption to oil flows and demonstrate how limited the response options are for China. 
Oceania region 
Australia accounts for over 90 per cent of exports from the Oceania region and has been among 
the biggest economic beneficiaries of growing Chinese resource import demand. Imports from the

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
63 
region consist mainly of iron ore and coal. China is now Australia’s biggest trading partner, and 
Australia is China’s biggest resource supplier – the conclusion of a strategic partnership agreement 
between the two countries in April 2013 and the China–Australia Free Trade Agreement (ChAFTA) in 
2014 will support the continued expansion of this trade relationship. Despite the strong economic ties, 
however, bilateral relations have at times been tense. Australia has been critical of China’s role in the 
South China Sea
273
 and apprehensive about Chinese investments in strategic assets; several takeovers 
in the mining sector have been blocked on national security grounds.
274
 
North America 
A large share of North American resource trade with China consists of agricultural products, such 
as large quantities of soybeans from the US and other oilseeds like rapeseed from Canada, as well 
as forestry products. Soybean imports are closely linked to China’s fast-expanding meat production. 
Large quantities of metals, particularly copper, gold and nickel, are also being exported. The region 
may also emerge as a significant future source of fossil fuel exports to China, if the North American 
surge in unconventional gas and oil can be sustained and if significant regulatory hurdles and 
infrastructure bottlenecks can be overcome. While the US and Canada have been keen to benefit from 
fast-growing Chinese imports and investments in the resource sector, major acquisitions in the sector 
remain a politically sensitive issue.
275
South America 
South America is the fastest-growing export region to China, supplying a wide variety of 
resources from fossil fuels and metals to agricultural and forestry products. Its importance as a 
supplier to China is likely to grow further – in 2014 President Xi announced the goal of boosting trade 
with the region to half a trillion dollars per year and boosting China’s foreign direct investment (FDI) 
in the continent to $250 billion.
276
 This cooperation is underpinned by increasingly strong political 
ties, with many countries in the region perceiving China as a useful counterweight to the influence 
of the US.
277
 China’s relations with Latin American countries are, however, not without tensions. 
Concerns have been raised over the environmental and social practices of Chinese investors and 
over the imbalanced nature of the trading relationship – China’s imports from the region consist 
overwhelmingly of unprocessed natural resources, while Latin America has become an important 
destination for Chinese manufactured goods.
278
 A growing number of trade restrictions aimed at 
shielding domestic industry from Chinese competition have been imposed.
279
Sub-Saharan Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa has emerged as another fast-growing resource supplier to China in a relatively 
short time. The lion’s share of African resource exports still consists of fossil fuels, particularly crude 
oil from Angola and the Sudans. This is followed by metals, including iron ore, precious metals and 
chrome from South Africa, bauxite from Guinea, gold from Ghana, and copper from Zambia and the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Mozambique and Tanzania have the potential to become important 
suppliers of gas and oil following significant offshore discoveries. Guinea and a number of its West 
African neighbours may also emerge as significant sources of iron ore, although the immediate 
prospects for greenfield mega-sites such as Simandou remain uncertain in the current macroeconomic 
climate. At present, however, Africa remains a relatively small player in global resource production 
compared with other regions, despite the attention it receives as a major destination for foreign energy 
and mineral resource investment and land acquisitions.
280

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
64 
Fossil fuels
100bn
USD
Value
Scale
10bn
USD
1bn
USD
All resource ﬂows equal to or greater than $1 billion in 2014, equalling 98.3% of all resource ﬂows into China
Major trade ﬂows (top three, percentage of total value of regional exports)
Metals and ores Fertilizers Agriculture and forestry
1. MENA: Crude oil (69%), LNG (23%), Reﬁned oil (4%)
2. South America: Soybeans (26%), Copper (24%), Iron ore (17%)
3. Oceania: Iron ore (55%), Hard coal and coke (9%), Gold (7%)
4. Sub-Saharan Africa: Iron ore (28%), Crude oil (16%), Copper (13%)
5. North America: Soybeans (22%), Gold (13%), Copper (9%)
6. South East Asia: Reﬁned oil (23%), Palm fruit (1 1%), Low rank coal (10%)
7 . East Asia: Reﬁned oil (32%), Rolled iron and steel (23%), Copper (14%)
8. Central and Northern Asia: Crude oil (64%), Copper (10%), Iron ore (5%)
9. Europe: Gold (52%), Copper (8%), Pork (3%)
10. South Asia: Cotton and yarn (39%), Copper (19%), Reﬁned oil (14%)
1 1. Caribbean and Central America: Copper (42%), Sawn wood (9%), Iron and steel scrap (7%)
1
2
3
4
5
6
9
8
10 7
11
Figure 12: China’s resource interdependencies
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, COMTRADE (2015).

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
65 
Key concerns for China
The concentration of resources among relatively few suppliers is a key resource security concern for 
China. Just 18 trade partners – each exporting over $10 billion worth of natural resources to China per 
year – together account for over 70 per cent of China’s total resource imports (see Table 3). Four are 
China’s neighbours (Russia, Japan, South Korea, and Indonesia), five are Middle Eastern oil exporters 
(Saudi Arabia, Iran, Oman, Iraq and UAE), three are South American (Brazil, Chile and Venezuela), 
two are African (Angola and South Africa), and four are advanced economies that are resource-rich 
(Australia, the US and Canada) or processing centres (EU). 
Table 3: China’s top resource trade partners in 2014 (trade flows over $10 billion)
Exporter Resource 
exports 
to China 
(USD 
billion) 
Share of 
China’s 
overall 
resource 
imports
Key products (share of resource exports to China) Share of China in 
overall resource 
exports
Australia 86.0 13% Iron ores and concentrates (59%), Hard coal and coke 
(10%), Gold (7%), Copper (5%)
35%
Brazil 44.8 7% Soybeans (41%), Iron ores and concentrates (35%), Crude 
oil (9%), Wood pulp, chips and particles (4%), Skins, hides 
and leather (2%)
27%
US 41.2 6% Soybeans (38%), Copper (9%), Wood waste and waste 
products (6%) 
11 %
Saudi Arabia 38.0 6% Crude oil (97%), Refined oil (2%), Other gas, 
liquefied (1%)
13%
Russia 31.2 5% Crude oil (67%), Sawn wood (4%), Logs and roughly 
treated wood (4%), Nickel (4%), Hard coal and coke (4%)
6%
Angola 31.0 5% Crude oil (99%) 52%
EU 29.9 5% Copper (20%), Gold (15%), Rolled iron and steel (6%), 
Pork (5%), Wood waste and waste products (4%)
3%
Iran 23.3 4% Crude oil (89%), Iron ores and concentrates (4%), Refined 
oil (1%)
49%
Oman 22.4 3% Crude oil (99%) 48%
Iraq 20.7 3% Crude oil (100%) 25%
Chile 19.5 3% Copper (79%), Wood chips, pulp and particles (6%), Iron 
ores and concentrates (6%), Fruit and berries (4%) 
29%
Japan 14.8 2% Rolled iron and steel (32%), Copper (23%), Iron and steel 
scrap (9%), Refined oil (8%), Wood waste and waste 
products (4%)
20%
Canada 14.4 2% Other oilseeds (21%), Wood pulp, chips and particles 
(13%), Sawn wood (10%), Copper (9%), Iron ores and 
concentrates (8%)
6%
South Korea 13.7 2% Refined oil (44%), Rolled iron and steel (27%), Copper 
(13%), Aluminium (4%), Skins, hides and leather (3%)
15%
Indonesia 13.6 2% Low rank coal (27%), Palm fruit (17%), Hard coal and coke 
(14%), Wood pulp, chips and particles (10%), LNG (6%)
13%
United Arab 
Emirates
12.9 2% Crude oil (70%), Other gas, liquefied (24%), Refined oil 
(2%), Copper (1%), Other oil seeds (1%)
8%
Venezuela 11. 2 2% Crude oil (74%), Refined oil (23%), Iron ores and 
concentrates (2%)
17%
South Africa 10.8 2% Iron ores and concentrates (42%), Chromium (19%), 
Platinum (1 1%), Manganese (8%), Wood pulp, chips and 
particles (4%),
16%
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE (2015). 
Note: Data for mainland China, excludes China interregional flows.

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
66 
From China’s perspective, its resource import profile is actually more diversified than that of other 
major importing regions in aggregate terms. The top five resource suppliers account for just 36 per 
cent of China’s imports, by value, compared with 42 per cent for the EU and 51 per cent for Japan. 
The top five resource suppliers to the US provide 63 per cent of total resource imports, though the US 
meets much of its own resources consumption. Australia is the only country that provides more than 
10 per cent of China’s resource imports. Only three other countries (Brazil, the US and Saudi Arabia) 
account for more than 5 per cent of China’s imports each. 
However, for some specific commodities there are examples of higher concentrations. Across six 
critical import streams, the four largest suppliers provide between half and four-fifths of China’s 
imports (Table 4). Australia accounts for 59 per cent of iron ore; Australia and Indonesia provide 40 
per cent and 31 per cent of coal, respectively; Turkmenistan supplies 40 per cent of gas; and Chile 24 
per cent of copper imports.
Table 4: Share of top four suppliers of key commodities, 2014
Resource Share of four largest 
suppliers
Countries (share in total commodity imports)
Crude oil 52% Saudi Arabia (16%), Angola (14%), Russia (12%), Oman (10%)
Coal 84% Australia (40%), Indonesia (31%), Russia (7%), North Korea (5%)
Gas and LNG 79% Turkmenistan (40%), Qatar (29%), Myanmar (6%), Malaysia (5%)
Copper 47% Chile (24%), EU (10%), Peru (7%), Australia (7%)
Iron ore 85% Australia (59%), Brazil (18%), South Africa (6%), Ukraine (2%)
Potash 80% Russia (24%), Belarus (22%), Israel (18%), Canada (16%)
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE (2015). 
Note: Data for mainland China, excludes China interregional flows.
Box 9: China’s experience of supply disruptions 
So far, China has not experienced any large-scale import-related disruptions in resource supply. 
Past global supply disruptions, e.g. during the oil shocks of the 1970s or during the Gulf War in 1991, 
had limited impacts on China, which at the time was still a net exporter of crude oil. But several 
smaller-scale disruptions have affected Chinese import streams in recent years, which demonstrate 
the growing exposure of the Chinese economy to shocks as a result of market concentration and 
the proliferation of export restrictions; threats to the security of key resource corridors and maritime 
chokepoints; and overseas investments in resources that have underperformed and embroiled China 
in political, environmental and social risks. 
India: Since 2010, iron ore export bans and tariffs have contributed to a 72 per cent decline in iron 
ore exports to China.
281
 India was the third-largest iron ore exporter to China in 201 1,
282
 but in 2014–15 
the country became a net iron ore importer, buying 15.5 million tonnes.
283
 China mitigated declining 
Indian exports by increasing iron ore imports from Australia and Brazil, but was still exposed to the 
immediate price impact. The disruption was estimated to have added approximately $40 per tonne to 
global iron ore prices in early 2013.
284

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
67 
Indonesia: In January 2014 Indonesia banned raw nickel exports in an attempt to increase 
in-country beneficiation.
285 
Indonesia accounts for 20 per cent of global nickel production,
286
 
and approximately 90 per cent of its nickel ore exports in 2013 went to China.
287 
Chinese nickel 
consumers stockpiled at least 18 million tonnes
 
in anticipation of the ban, and the price of 
imported nickel increased by over 35 per cent in the six months following implementation of 
the ban. The Philippines has emerged to fill the supply gap, accounting for 74 per cent of China’s 
nickel imports in 2014,
288
 but its use increases costs at the processing stage by 30 per cent due 
to its lower quality. China’s nickel, pig iron (NPI) output is expected to drop from around 485,000 
tonnes in 2013 to just 360,000 tonnes in 2015.
289
 
South Sudan: South Sudan’s oil production rapidly increased following the country’s secession from 
Sudan in July 201 1, rising from an average of 50,000 barrels per day (bpd) in 2012 to 245,000 bpd 
by December 2013.
290
 China is South Sudan’s largest investor,
291 
and accounted for 80 per cent of the 
country’s oil exports in 2012.
292
 However, conflict since mid-December 2013 has reduced production 
by approximately 35 per cent
293 
resulting in an 85,000 bpd shortfall for China. Chinese assets are 
heavily exposed to the conflict – CNPC is the largest investor in South Sudan and has operations in 
Upper Nile state, the only region to continue production.
294
 In early 2015, over 400 Chinese nationals 
were reportedly evacuated from the facility as conflict intensified.
295
 
Key concerns for exporters 
Established and emerging resource-exporting economies, by contrast, are engaged in a balancing 
act. On one hand, many are seeking to gain and maintain access to the Chinese market, and court 
Chinese investment in their resource sectors. On the other hand, governments in many producer 
countries are concerned about growing dependence on China. With the exception of four trade 
partners (the US, the EU, Japan and South Korea), China’s top 18 suppliers depend on the resource 
sector as engine of their economies and exports. On average, one-fifth of the exports from these 
countries goes to China, although some exporters are more exposed, including Angola (52%), 
Australia (35%), Iran (49%) and Oman (48%).
However, there is another group of smaller producers for whom China’s resource demand is 
equally important. As Figure 13 illustrates, China accounts for at least 80 per cent of overall resource 
exports from South Sudan (98%), North Korea (95%), Sierra Leone (92%), Turkmenistan (85%) 
and Mongolia (84%). Some of the lowest income and least developed countries in the world are 
heavily dependent on China; for fossil fuels the list includes Laos (95% of total fossil fuel exports), 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (76%), Sudan (63%) and Congo (58%) while for metals and 
minerals it includes Liberia (60% of total metals and minerals imports) and Eritrea (60%). China’s 
resource demand and its choices as trade and development partner will have major implications for 
these countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
68 
Figure 13: Share of China as a percentage of total country exports in 2014 (where exports to 
China equal one-third or more of total resource exports)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Australia 
Oman 
Zambia 
Mauritania 
Iran 
Congo 
Angola 
Sudan 
Laos 
Solomon Islands
Mongolia 
Turkmenistan 
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Central African Republic 
Liberia 
Gambia 
Eritrea 
Sierra Leone 
North Korea 
South Sudan 
All resources Fossil fuels Metals and minerals 
% LICsMICsHICs
Source: Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE (2015).
The Chatham House Resource T rade Database 
The Chatham House Resource Trade Database reorganises UN COMTRADE data around natural 
resources, and reconciles reports from exporters and importers to produce single entries – each 
representing the aggregate value (US$) and weight (kg) of a single commodity flow from one 
country to another over one year. Further information on the Database is available at: 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/about/structure/eer-department/resource-trade-database

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
69 
Acronyms and abbreviations 
AIIB Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
APEC Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BASIC Brazil, South Africa, India and China
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
CASS Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
CBRC China Banking Regulatory Commission 
CCCMC China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals and Chemicals 
CDB China Development Bank 
CE circular economy
CEECs Central and Eastern European countries
CELAC Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
ChAFTA China-Australia Free Trade Agreement
CITIC China International Trust and Investment Corporation 
CMF Combined Maritime Forces 
CNOOC China National Offshore Oil Corporation 
CNPC China National Petroleum Corporation
COMTRADE UN Commodity Trade Statistics Database
COP Conference of the Parties 
CPC Communist Party of China 
CTF – 151 Combined Taskforce 151 (Counter piracy)
DRC Development Research Center of the State Council (China)
ECOSOC United Nations Economic and Social Council 
ECT Energy Charter Treaty
EIA Energy Information Administration 
EITI Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EMF Ellen MacArthur Foundation
ESG environmental, social and governance
EU European Union
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FDI foreign direct investment 
FOCAC Forum on China–Africa Cooperation
FYP Five-Year Plan
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
GDP gross domestic product
GGFR Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership
GGGI Global Green Growth Institute
G20 Group of Twenty
G77 Group of 77
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
70 
ICBC Industrial and Commercial Bank of China
ICSID International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes 
ICT information communications technology
IEA International Energy Agency
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency
IEF (JODI) International Energy Forum (Joint Oil Data Initiative)
IFC International Finance Corporation
IGF Intergovernmental Forum on Mining, Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development
IMF International Monetary Fund
IMO International Maritime Organization
INE Shanghai International Energy Exchange
IOC international oil company
IOPC International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
IRTC Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor 
KP Kyoto Protocol
LDC least developed country
LME London Metal Exchange
LNG liquefied natural gas
MARPOL International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
MENA Middle East and North Africa
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MLR Ministry of Land and Resources
MOFCOM Ministry of Commerce 
NACA China National Coal Association
NAM Non-Aligned Movement 
NDB New Development Bank
NDRC National Development and Reform Commission
NEA National Energy Administration
NGO non-governmental organization
NOC national oil company
NPI nickel pig iron
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPEC Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
PV solar photovoltaic
SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organization
SCP sustainable consumption and production
SGE Shanghai Gold Exchange
SHADE Shared Awareness & Deconfliction 
Sinopec China Petroleum & Chemical Corporation
SOE state-owned enterprise
TPP Trans-Pacific Partnership
TTIP Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership
UN United Nations
UNCHE United Nations Conference on the Human Environment

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
71 
UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
UNCLOS United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
UNCLOS (IA) United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (Implementing Agreement)
UNCTAD UN Conference on Trade and Development
UNDRIP United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UNGA United Nations General Assembly
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization
USGS US Geological Survey
WBCSD World Business Council for Sustainable Development
WEF World Economic Forum
WSSD World Summit on Sustainable Development 
WTO World Trade Organization

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
72 
Acknowledgements 
This report is the final output of a two-year research project undertaken jointly by the Royal Institute 
of International Affairs (Chatham House) and the Development Research Center of the State Council 
(DRC). The project benefited greatly from discussions at six expert workshops held in Beijing over the 
course of the project; and at the first China-UK Reform and Innovation Forum (co-convened by Chatham 
House and DRC and held at Chatham House in October 2015); as well as from bilateral conversations 
with a wide range of stakeholders. 
Although the contributors are too numerous to mention in full, the authors would particularly like to 
thank Kang Bingjian (MOFCOM), Chen Liping (MLR), Lv Wenbin (NDRC), An Fengquan (NEA), Shi 
Dan (CASS) and Shantanu Mitra (DFID) for their expert guidance. Special thanks go to Zhou Hongchun 
(DRC), Gu Shuzhong (DRC) and Chen Liping, who prepared papers that fed into the research process. 
The project benefited greatly from advice from Chen Boping (WWF China), Edward Clarence-Smith 
(UNIDO), Han Wenke (ERI), Michael Jarvis (World Bank), Waikei Raphael Lam (IMF), Bernice Lee 
(WEF and Chatham House), Lizzie Parsons (Global Witness), Xiaoli Tang (GGGI) and Shane Tomlinson 
(Chatham House). The authors have endeavored to incorporate the many insightful comments and 
suggestions generously provided by the following peer reviewers: Philip Andrews-Speed, Sam Geall, 
Michal Meidan, Katherine Morton and Tim Summers. All errors in the report are the authors’ own.
Jaakko Kooroshy was a key member of the research team prior to leaving Chatham House in late 2014 
and, along with Siân Bradley and Felix Preston, was responsible for methodological improvements in 
the Chatham House Resource Trade Database over the course of the project. Benjamin Zala (Australian 
National University) made significant analytical and written contributions to the report, in particular 
in Section 5. Bernice Lee provided valuable input and advice at key points in the project. The authors 
would also like to thank Jens Hein for coordinating the project, and Johanna Lehne, Liao Maolin, Bai 
Fan, Richard King, Isabelle Edwards, Dileimy Orozco and Maria Tauber for their input and support. 
Thanks to Jay Sivell and Jake Statham for editing the report, and to MOFCOM and China Dialogue for 
providing translation services.
The authors extend special thanks to Shantanu Mitra (DFID) and to Christian Romig (FCO) for 
their advice and support throughout the project. The project was conceived and initiated by Bernice 
Lee and Feng Fei (now Vice Minister at MIIT). Long Guoqiang (Vice-President of the DRC) kindly 
thanks the project team for their research. Finally, this project would not have been possible without 
financial support from the UK Department for International Development (DFID) and the UK Foreign 
& Commonwealth Office (FCO). The views expressed in this report are those of the authors and do 
not represent those of the UK government.

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
73 
About the authors
Felix Preston is a Senior Research Fellow in the Energy, Environment and Resources Department at 
the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House).
Rob Bailey is Research Director of the Energy, Environment and Resources Department at the Royal 
Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House). 
Siân Bradley is a Research Associate in the Energy, Environment and Resources Department at 
the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House). 
Dr Wei Jigang is a Senior Research Fellow in the Department of Industrial Economy at the 
Development Research Center of the State Council (DRC). 
Dr Zhao Changwen is Director of the Department of Industrial Economy at the Development 
Research Center of the State Council (DRC).

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
74 
Notes and references
1 President Barack Obama and President Xi Jinping (2015), U.S.-China Joint Presidential Statement on Climate Change, The White 
House – Office of the Press Secretary, 25 September, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/09/25/us-china-joint-
presidential-statement-climate-change. 
2 For a summary of the emergence of ecological civilisation in Chinese policy discourse, see Chapter 2 of Morton, K. (2009), China 
and the global environment – Learning form the Past, Anticipating the Future, Lowy Institute Paper 29, Lowy Institute for International 
Policy, 24 November, http://www.lowyinstitute.org/files/pubfiles/Morton,_China_and_the_global_environment_WEB.pdf. 
3 In a circular economy, industry, agriculture and services would be organised along ecological lines to minimise resource use. 
China has had a circular economy strategy since 2002, and the government stepped up action during the 12th Five Year Plan 
(201 1–2015), focusing on heavy industry.
4 ERI and Grantham Institute for Climate Change (2014), Global Energy Governance Reform and China’s Participation, Energy 
Research Institute, NDRC; Grantham Institute for Climate Change, February 2014, https://workspace.imperial.ac.uk/climatechange/
Public/pdfs/Global%20Energy%20Governance%20Reform%20and%20China’s%20Participation.pdf. 
5 See for example ERI and Grantham Institute for Climate Change (2014), Global Energy Governance Reform and China’s 
Participation; Kong, B. (201 1), Governing China’s Energy in the Context of Global Governance, Global Policy Volume 2, Special 
Issue; Florini, A. (201 1), The International Energy Agency in Global Energy Governance, Global Policy Volume 2, Special Issue; 
Colgan, J. (2009), The International Energy Agency – Challenges for the 21
st Century, Global Public Policy Institute Policy Paper 
Series No. 2009, http://www.gppi.net/fileadmin/user_upload/media/pub/2009/Colgan_2009_The_International_Energy.pdf. 
6 See for example Global Ocean Commission Final Report (2014), From Decline to Recovery – A Rescue Package for the Global 
Ocean, Global Ocean Commission, 24 June, http://www.globaloceancommission.org/wp-content/uploads/GOC_Report_20_6.
FINAL_.spreads.pdf; Emmerson, C. and Lahn, G. (2012), Arctic Opening: Opportunity and Risk in the High North, Lloyds, April 2012, 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/182839.
7 Kooroshy, J. Preston, P . and Bradley, S. (2014), Cartels and Competition: Challenges to Global Governance, 17 December, 
Chatham House, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/cartels-and-competition-minerals-markets-challenges-global-
governance.
8 See for example Alves, A.C. (2014), China’s Economic Statecraft in Africa: Continuity and Change, Harvard Asia Quarterly, Spring 2014.
9 Research by China National Petroleum University has suggested that the vast majority of production by the big 3 NOCs [CNOOC, 
CNPC and Sinopec] is sold on the international market. See Yu Hongyan (201 1), Oil majors see losses in overseas investment, 
China Daily, 19 July, http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/china/201 1-07/19/content_12941391.htm. For a broader perspective; see 
Economy, E. and Levi, M. (2014), By All Means Necessary: How China’s Resource Quest is Changing the World, OUP , 2014. 
10 See China Chamber of Commerce of Metals, Minerals & Chemicals Importers & Exporters (CCCMC), (2015), Guidelines for Social 
Responsibility in Outbound Mining Investments; Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation (OECD), (2015), Public 
consultation on the draft Chinese Due Diligence Guidelines for Responsible Mineral Supply Chains, OECD and CCCMC, November, 
https://mneguidelines.oecd.org/publicconsultationonthedraftchineseduediligenceguidelinesforresponsiblemineralsupplychains.htm.
11 Report of the Task Force (2014), Task Force on Evaluation and Prospects for a Green Transition Process in China, China Council 
for International Cooperation on Environment and Development (CCICED), 1–3 December, http://www.cciced.net/encciced/
policyresearch/report/201504/P020150413497198320874.pdf. 
12 Chatham House analysis of BP (2015), Statistical Review of World Energy 2015, June, http://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/
energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy.html and World Bank data (2015), Gross National Income (GNI), http://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/NY .GNP .ATLS.CD.
13 Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre and Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2015), Global Trends in Renewable Energy Investment 2015, 
http://fs-unep-centre.org/sites/default/files/attachments/key_messages.pdf.
14 Stanway, D. and Chen, K. (2015), China coal imports slum further in May as policies bite, Reuters, 8 June, http://www.reuters.
com/article/2015/06/08/china-economy-trade-coal-idUSL3N0YR2Z220150608; Ng, J. (2015), Shrinking Iron Ore Imports Yet Another 
Sign of China Slowing, Bloomberg Business, 8 September, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-08/shrinking-iron-
ore-imports-yet-another-sign-of-china-slowing. 
15 Lam, R., Liu, X. and Schipke, A. (2015), China’s Labor Market in the “New Normal”, IMF Working Paper, WP 15:151, July, 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2015/wp15151.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
75 
16 World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council (2013), China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, 
and Creative Society, Washington, DC: World Bank, http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/China-2030-
complete.pdf. 
17 World Bank and Development Research Center of the State Council (2013), China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, 
and Creative Society, Washington, DC: World Bank, http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/China-2030-
complete.pdf. 
18 Sanderson, H. (2015), Goldman says Chinese metals in for a ‘hard landing’, Financial Times, 29 July, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/
f03eac28-3503-1 1e5-bdbb-35e55cbae175.html.
19 Egan, M. (2015), These nations are panicking with gold and copper prices so low, CNN Money. http://money.cnn.com/2015/07/31/
investing/metal-prices-falling-emerging-markets/index.html?category=home-international. 
20 Said, S. (2015), OPEC 2014 Exports Below $1 Trillion; First Time Since 2010, The Wall Street Journal, June 16, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/opec-2014-exports-below-1-trillion-first-time-since-2010-1434475699.
21 Bowler, T . (2015), Falling oil prices: Who are the winners and losers? BBC News, 19 January, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
business-29643612.; Brock, J. (2015), Angola’s economy set to slow as oil prices collapse, Reuters, 29 January, http://uk.reuters.
com/article/2015/01/29/angola-economy-idUSL6N0V645F20150129; Magnowski, D. (2014), Nigeria Plans Budget Cuts as Oil Price 
Drop Erodes Revenue, Bloomberg Business, 16 November, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-1 1-16/nigeria-plans-
budget-cuts-as-oil-price-drop-erodes-revenue.
22 Republic of Ghana Ministry of Finance (2015), Implications of the fall in crude oil prices on the 2015 budget, pg. 6, 12 March, 
http://www.mofep.gov.gh/sites/default/files/news/Crude-Oil-Prices-on-the-2015-Budget-150312.pdf.
23 Stevens, P ., Lahn, G. and Kooroshy, J. (2015), The Resource Curse Revisited, Chatham House, https://www.chathamhouse.org/
sites/files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20150804ResourceCurseRevisitedStevensLahnKooroshy_0.pdf.
24 Adams, C. (2015), Plunging oil prices put question mark over $1.5tn of projects, Financial Times, 21 September, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3ba5d0a8-5e29-1 1e5-a28b-50226830d644.html.
25 Wood MacKenzie (2016), Pre-FID 2016: US$380bn of capex deferred, 16 January, http://www.woodmac.com/analysis/PreFID-
2016-USD380bn-capex-deferred. Associated Australian Press (2015), Rio Tinto: we’ll thrive on lower iron ore prices while others 
suffer, says boss, 17 April, The Guardian, http://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/17/rio-tinto-well-thrive-on-lower-iron-
ore-prices-while-others-suffer-says-boss. 
26 Steffen, W. et al. (2015), Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet, Science, Vol. 347 , no. 6223, 
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/347/6223/1259855.abstract, DOI: 10.1 126/science.1259855; Sims, A. (2015), Our environmental 
deficit is now beyond nature’s ability to regenerate, The Guardian, 3 August, http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/
aug/03/our-environmental-deficit-is-now-beyond-natures-ability-to-regenerate.
27 IPCC (2014), Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change, Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O. et al (eds.)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY , http://mitigation2014.org/report/publication/.
28 Shuo, L. and Myllyvirta, L. (2014), The End of China’s Coal Boom – 6 facts you should know, Greenpeace East Asia, April 1 1, 
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/briefings/climate/2014/The-End-of-Chinas-Coal-Boom.pdf.
29 The Central Committee of the Communist Party’s Central Document Number 12 “Opinions of the Central Committee of 
the Communist Party of China and the State Council on Further Promoting the Development of Ecological Civilisation” 
‘systematically addresses the obstacles to effective policy by setting out standards, mechanisms and assessments that aim to 
improve implementation and realise the ambition it proclaims’. See Geall, S. (2015), Interpreting ecological civilisation (part one), 
chinadialogue, 6 July, https://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/8018-Interpreting-ecological-civilisation-part-one-.
30 Evans, S. (2015), Official data confirms Chinese coal use fell in 2014, Carbon Brief, 26 February, http://www.carbonbrief.org/
blog/2015/02/official-data-confirms-chinese-coal-use-fell-in-2014/.
31 Coal consumption fell in the period January and October by 4.7% year-on-year, see CCTV (2015), China’s coal consumption falls 
nearly 5% in 2015, CCTV, 18 November, http://english.cntv.cn/2015/1 1/18/VIDE1447799407330627 .shtml.
32 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China (2014), Xi Jinping and President Barack Obama of the US Jointly 
Meet the Press, 1 1 November, http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/topics_665678/ytjhzzdrsrcldrfzshyjxghd/t121 1023.shtml.
33 Clover, C. (2015), China’s leaders focus on slowing economy, Financial Times, 29 March, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/05c7a06c-
d5ec-1 1e4-a598-00144feab7de.html. 
34 Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Saudi Arabia, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan all derive at least 20% of their GDP from 
natural resource rents. See World Bank data (2015), Total natural resources rents (% of GDP), http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NY .GDP .TOTL.RT .ZS.

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
76 
35 Ikenberry, J. (201 1), The Future of the Liberal World Order: Internationalism After America, Foreign Affairs, May/June Issue, 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/201 1-05-01/future-liberal-world-order.
36 Luers, A.L., Mastrandrea, M.D., Hayhoe, K. and Frumhoff, P .C. (2007), How to Avoid Dangerous Climate Change – A Target for 
US Emissions Reductions, Union of Concerned Scientists, September, http://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/legacy/assets/
documents/global_warming/emissions-target-report.pdf.
37 Davies Boren, Z. and Myllyvirta, L. (2015), 2015: The year global coal consumption fell off a cliff, Greenpeace, 9 November, 
http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2015/1 1/09/2015-the-year-global-coal-consumption-fell-off-a-cliff/.
38 Deng, C. (2015), China Stocks Suffer Sharpest Daily Fall Since 2007, The Wall Street Journal, 27 July, http://www.wsj.com/articles/
asian-stocks-fall-pressured-by-weak-earnings-overseas-1437961 185.
39 Angang, H. (2015), Embracing China’s “New Normal”, Foreign Affairs, May/June 2015, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
china/2015-04-20/embracing-chinas-new-normal.
40 Report of the Task Force (2014), Task Force on Evaluation and Prospects for a Green Transition Process in China, China Council 
for International Cooperation on Environment and Development (CCICED), 1–3 December, http://www.cciced.net/encciced/
policyresearch/report/201504/P020150413497198320874.pdf.
41 chinadialogue (2013), Will Beijing’s $277 billion air pollution plan work, chinadialogue, https://www.chinadialogue.net/blog/6255-
Will-Beijing-s-277-billion-air-pollution-plan-work-/en.
42 Hove, A., Myllyvirta, L. and Quek, C. (2015), Beijing Blue Skies – Is this the New Normal? Paulson Institute, 24 June, 
http://www.paulsoninstitute.org/paulson-blog/2015/06/24/beijing-blue-skies-is-this-the-new-normal/.
43 Green, F . and Stern, N. (2015), China’s “new normal”: structural change, better growth, and peak emissions, Grantham Research 
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment. http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Chinas_
new_normal_green_stern_June_2015.pdf.
44 Government of the People’s Republic of China (2015), Enhanced Actions on Climate Change: China’s Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions, http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/China/1/China’s%20INDC%20-%20
on%2030%20June%202015.pdf.
45 Shifflet, S.C. et al (2015), China’s Water-Energy-Food Roadmap- A Global Choke Point Report, Woodrow Wilson International 
Center for Scholars, February, https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/Water-energy-food%20Roadmap.pdf.
46 Reuters (2015), China coal firms suffer H1 profit slump on weak demand, 31 July, http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/07/31/
china-coal-profits-idUSL3N10A41P20150731.
47 Kaixi, H. (2015), New Faces, New Reforms for Big Oil in China, 5 May, http://english.caixin.com/2015-05-14/100809088.html.
48 Reuters (2015), China power firms return to profit as coal miners lose out, 2 September, http://in.reuters.com/article/2015/09/02/
china-power-idINL4N1 123OX20150902. 
49 Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre and Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2015), Global Trends in Renewable Energy Investment 2015, 
http://fs-unep-centre.org/sites/default/files/attachments/key_messages.pdf. 
50 Meidan, M., Sen, A., and Campbell, R. (2015), China: the ‘new normal’, The Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, February 2015, 
http://www.oxfordenergy.org/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/China-the-new-normal.pdf. 
51 Meidan, M., Sen, A., and Campbell, R. (2015), China: the ‘new normal’, The Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, February 2015, 
http://www.oxfordenergy.org/wpcms/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/China-the-new-normal.pdf. 
52 Report of the Task Force (2014), Task Force on Evaluation and Prospects for a Green Transition Process in China, China Council 
for International Cooperation on Environment and Development (CCICED), 1–3 December, http://www.cciced.net/encciced/
policyresearch/report/201504/P020150413497198320874.pdf. 
53 Duggan, J. (2014), China’s polluters to face large fines under law change, The Guardian. http://www.theguardian.com/
environment/chinas-choice/2014/apr/25/china-environment-law-fines-for-pollution.
54 Hove, A., Myllyvirta, L. and Quek, C. (2015), Beijing Blue Skies – Is this the New Normal? Paulson Institute. 24 June, 
http://www.paulsoninstitute.org/paulson-blog/2015/06/24/beijing-blue-skies-is-this-the-new-normal/.
55 Angang, H. (2015), Embracing China’s “New Normal”, Foreign Affairs, May/June 2015, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/
china/2015-04-20/embracing-chinas-new-normal.
56 Hofman, B. (2015), Navigating Policies for the New Normal, The World Bank, 14 January, https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/
opinion/2015/01/14/navigating-policies-for-the-new-normal.
57 International Energy Agency (IEA), (2014), Capturing the Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency – Executive Summary, OECD/IEA, 
https://www.iea.org/Textbase/npsum/MultipleBenefits2014SUM.pdf.
58 International Energy Agency (IEA), (2015), Energy and Climate Change – World Energy Outlook Special Report, June, https://www.
iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WEO2015SpecialReportonEnergyandClimateChange.pdf; International Energy

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
77 
Agency (IEA), (2015), Special data release with revisions for People’s Republic of China, IEA, September, https://www.iea.org/
publications/freepublications/publication/SpecialdatareleasewithrevisionsforPeoplesRepublicofChina04.1 1.2015.pdf.
59 Primary energy consumption mtoe in 2000 = 1001.7 , 2014 = 2972.1 roughly 2.9 times consumption in 2000. See BP (2015), 
Statistical Review of World Energy 2015, BP , https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/pdf/energy-economics/statistical-review-2015/bp-
statistical-review-of-world-energy-2015-full-report.pdf.
60 The 14 commodities include: metallurgical coal, thermal coal, aluminium, nickel, zinc, copper, iron ore, lead, platinum, 
hydropower, palladium, oil, natural gas and nuclear energy. China is the largest consumer in all but two of these commodities: 
oil and gas. See Ro, S. (2015), China is the world’s largest consumer of most commodities, Business Insider, 1 1 August, 
http://uk.businessinsider.com/chinas-share-of-global-commodity-consumption-2015-8?r=US&IR=T .
61 Roberts, D. (2014), China Wants Its People in the Cities, Bloomberg Business, 20 March, http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/
articles/2014-03-20/china-wants-its-people-in-the-cities.
62 Zhou Hongchun (2014), China’s Strategy on Resource Security in the Context of Ecological Civilization, CH-DRC project 
input paper.
63 Zhou Hongchun (2014), China’s Strategy on Resource Security in the Context of Ecological Civilization, CH-DRC project input paper. 
64 Chatham House Resource Trade Database (2015), UN COMTRADE. 
65 Sanderson, H. (2015), Iron ore reaches record post-2008 low in steel demand slide, Financial Times, 24 November, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/82aad028-92ba-1 1e5-94e6-c5413829caa5.html; Stringer, D. and Riseborough, J. (2015), Miners Slide as 
Commodity Plunge Deepens on Dollar Gains, 23 November, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-1 1-23/glencore-leads-
slide-in-mining-stocks-as-commodity-rout-deepens. 
66 See Saunders, A. (2015), Which iron ore miners are most at risk at $US45? Sydney Morning Herald, 9 July, http://www.smh.com.
au/business/mining-and-resources/which-iron-ore-miners-are-most-at-risk-at-us45-20150708-gi8830.html#ixzz3sE3oGk68.
67 Lewin, J. and Hume, N. (2015), Bulk commodity shipping rates fall sharply, Financial Times, 30 January, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/973bdf56-a8a4-1 1e4-ad01-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk.
68 For example, Freeport McMoran and Glencore cut copper production in late 2015. See Hume, N. (2015), Metals climb on plans 
for output cuts, 9 September, Financial Times, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/738c0c88-56e2-1 1e5-a28b-50226830d644.html and 
Kantchev, G. (2015), Copper Rises on Production Cuts, The Wall Street Journal, 4 November, http://www.wsj.com/articles/copper-
rises-on-production-cuts-1446638045. In zinc markets, Glencore and a group of 10 Chinese smelters announced production cuts, 
see Sanderson, H. (2015), Zinc rallies after Chinese smelters announce cut, Financial Times, 20 November, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/22d0053c-8f73-1 1e5-a549-b89a1dfede9b.html#axzz3sJag3OBT . 
69 Chatham House analysis of market data, Yahoo Finance (2015), Historical data, 15 January, https://uk.finance.yahoo.com.
70 Chenoweth, N. (2015), It’s not just Clive Palmer that Citic is battling on $US12 billion mine, Australian Financial Review, 8 October, 
http://www.afr.com/business/mining/iron-ore/its-not-just-clive-palmer-that-citic-is-battling-on-us12-billion-mine-20151005-gk1as7; 
Tengri News (2014), Dropping oil prices cast a shadow of unprofitability over Kashagan, 07 November, http://en.tengrinews.kz/
politics_sub/Dropping-oil-prices-cast-a-shadow-of-unprofitability-over-257308/.
71 World Bank data (2015), GDP growth (annual %), http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY .GDP .MKTP .KD.ZG.
72 World Bank (2015), Slowdown reflects a permanent external change that calls for new response from Latin America, 15 April, 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2015/04/15/slowdown-reflects-a-permanent-external-change-that-calls-for-new-
responses-from-latin-america.
73 Mitchell, J., Marcel, V. and Mitchell, B. (2015), Oil and Gas Mismatches: Finance, Investment and Climate Policy, Chatham House, 
July 2015. See also Stevens, P . (2014), The Death of the International Oil and Gas Companies? presented at Chatham House, 
October 2014, http://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20141030FossilFuelPresentation.pdf. 
74 McGlade, C. and Ekins, P . (2015), The geographical distribution of fossil fuels unused when limiting global warming to 2°C, 
Nature, 516: 187–190.; The Conversation (2014), Fossil fuel campaigners win support from unexpected places, 4 February, 
http://theconversation.com/fossil-fuel-campaigners-win-support-from-unexpected-places-19394.
75 Aizhu, C. (2015), China tries to ditch its coal addiction, reduce energy intensity, Reuters, 5 March, http://www.reuters.com/
article/2015/03/05/us-china-parliament-ndrc-idUSKBN0M108V20150305.
76 The Climate Group (2015), Over 100 Companies, States, Regions and Cities have made ambitions Climate Commitments, 5 June, 
http://www.theclimategroup.org/what-we-do/news-and-blogs/over-100-companies-states-regions-and-cities-have-made-ambitious-
climate-commitments/.
77 Phillips, T . and Allen, K. (2015), Global markets steady despite further falls in Chinese shares, The Guardian, 28 July, 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/28/chinese-shares-suffer-further-falls.
78 Home, A. (2015), If China’s slowing, why are its copper imports so strong? CNBC, 22 October, http://www.cnbc.com/2015/10/22/
reuters-america-column-if-chinas-slowing-why-are-its-copper-imports-so-strong-andy-home.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
78 
79 Reuters (2015), COLUMN-China commodity imports raise economic growth questions: Russell, 13 July, http://uk.reuters.com/
article/2015/07/13/column-russell-china-commodities-idUKL4N0ZT25F20150713. 
80 Reuters (2015), COLUMN-China commodity imports raise economic growth questions: Russell, 13 July, http://uk.reuters.com/
article/2015/07/13/column-russell-china-commodities-idUKL4N0ZT25F20150713.
81 Wells, P . (2015), Aussie dollar hit as China slowdown threatens growth, Financial Times, 2 September, http://www.ft.com/cms/
s/0/7c462e9c-51 17-1 1e5-8642-453585f2cfcd.html.
82 England, A. (2015), Zambia bears the brunt of China’s economic slowdown, Financial Times, 9 September, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/065afc1e-556b-1 1e5-a28b-50226830d644.html.
83 Smyth, J. (2015), China moves to shore up miners with tax cut, Financial Times, 9 April 2015, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/
a76ca0ea-de69-1 1e4-ba43-00144feab7de.html. 
84 Sanderson, H. (2015), Commodity surpluses set to rise as renminbi helps China producers, The Financial Times, 20 August, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/2086d594-4699-1 1e5-b3b2-1672f710807b.html.
85 Bloomberg Professional (2015), Bulks in a changing China: Commodity markets beyond peak steel, 19 August, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/bulks-in-a-changing-china-commodity-markets-beyond-peak-steel/.
86 For example, resource nationalism remained high on Ernst & Young’s top 10 business risks in 2015/16 (although fell from 
1st in 2012/13, to 4th risk in 2015), see; Ernst & Young, (2015), Business risks facing mining and metals 2015–2016, http://www.
ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY -business-risks-in-mining-and-metals-2015-2016/$FILE/EY -business-risks-in-mining-and-
metals-2015-2016.pdf. 
87 Bank for International Settlements (2007), BIS Quarterly Review, March, http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt0703.pdf.
88 Lee, B. et al (2012), Resources Futures, pg. 60, Chatham House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/
view/187947 .
89 U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2014), 
Wall Street Bank Involvement with Physical Commodities, November, http://www.hsgac.senate.gov/subcommittees/investigations/
reports. See also Erheriene, E. (2015), LME Launches New Round of Warehousing Rules Proposals, Wall Street Journal, 1 July, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/lme-launches-new-round-of-warehousing-rules-proposals-1435774843.
90 According to the US Energy Information Administration (2015), China consumed 8.93 million barrels per day in 2010, and the 
standard conversion factor is 7 .32 barrels per metric tonne. See US EIA International Energy Statistics, https://www.eia.gov/cfapps/
ipdbproject/iedindex3.cfm?tid=5&pid=5&aid=2&cid=CH,&syid=2010&eyid=2014&unit=TBPD and https://www.eia.gov/cfapps/
ipdbproject/iedindex3.cfm?tid=94&pid=57&aid=32&cid=CH,&syid=2010&eyid=2014&unit=BCOPMT . 
91 Wei Jigang (2014), Global Resource Governance and China’s Role, presentation, Chatham House – DRC workshop on global 
resource governance at the Development Research Centre of the State Council, Beijing, 18 July 2014.
92 Wei Jigang (2014), Global Resource Governance and China’s Role, input paper, Chatham House – DRC workshop on global 
resource governance at the Development Research Centre of the State Council, Beijing, 18 July 2014. 
93 See for example Lee, B. et al (2012), Resources Futures, Chatham House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/
publications/papers/view/187947; Jeonghoi, K. (2010), Recent trends in Export Restrictions, OECD Trade Policy Papers, 19 July, 
http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/trade/recent-trends-in-export-restrictions_5kmbjx63sl27-en?crawler=true.
94 Yu Hongyan (201 1), Oil majors see losses in overseas investment, China Daily, 19 July, http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/201 1-07/19/content_12941391.htm.
95 England, A. and Blas, J. (2014), China returns to hunt for African mine assets, The Financial Times, 6 February, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/7c2c6478-8f42-1 1e3-be85-00144feab7de.html.
96 Arnold, W. (2014), China’s Global Mining Play is Failing to Pan Out, The Wall Street Journal, 15 September, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/chinas-global-mining-play-is-failing-to-pan-out-1410402598.
97 Dawson, C. and Spegele, B. (2015), How a Chinese Company Slipped on Canada’s Oil Sands, The Wall Street Journal, 22 July, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/how-china-slipped-on-canadas-oil-sands-1437616832.
98 Farchy, J. (2014), Leaking pipelines to add up to $4bn in costs to Kashagan oil project, The Financial Times, 9 October, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d68ac9c0-4fc0-1 1e4-908e-00144feab7de.html; Stringer, D. (2015), Iron ore low won’t stop Citic’s 
Australian ‘disaster’, The Sydney Morning Herald, 1 April, http://www.smh.com.au/business/mining-and-resources/iron-ore-low-
wont-stop-citics-australian-disaster-20150331-1mcgk9.html.
99 Shinn, D.H. (2015), The Environmental Impact of China’s Investment in Africa, International Policy Digest, 8 April 2015, 
http://www.internationalpolicydigest.org/2015/04/08/the-environmental-impact-of-china-s-investment-in-africa/.
100 Kessey, K.D. and Arko, B. (2013), Small scale gold mining and environmental degradation, in Ghana: Issues of Mining Policy 
Implementation and Challenges, Journal of Studies in Social Sciences. Volume 5, Number 1: 12–30.; BBC (2013), Chad suspends 
China firm CNPC over oil spill, 14 August, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-23697269.

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
79 
101 Shinn, D. (2015), The Environmental Impact of China’s Investment in Africa, International Policy Digest, 8 April, 
http://www.internationalpolicydigest.org/2015/04/08/the-environmental-impact-of-china-s-investment-in-africa/.
102 Hook, L., and Sakoui, A. and Kirchgaessner, S. (2012), Cnooc heeds lessons of failed Unocal bid, The Financial Times, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/bd0bc91a-d4e1-1 1e1-9444-00144feabdc0.html; Cimilluca, D., Oster, S. and Or, A. (2009), Rio Tinto Scuttles 
Its Deal With Chinalco, The Wall Street Journal, http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB12441 1 140142684779.
103 Lei Wu and Xuejun Liu (2007), The “China Energy Threat” Thesis and Sino-U.S. Relations: A Critical Review, Journal 
of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies (in Asia), Vol.1, No. 1, http://www.mesi.shisu.edu.cn/_upload/article/21/13/
a43659d149ad8d5f4a22da3c627f/b886603a-ec0c-4f8e-b889-eae9628d316e.pdf.
104 Zhao Hongtu (2015), The myth of China’s overseas energy investment, East Asia Forum, 4 March, http://www.eastasiaforum.
org/2015/03/04/the-myth-of-chinas-overseas-energy-investment/; Chen, W., Dollar, D. and Tang, H. (2015), China’s direct investment 
in Africa: Reality versus myth, Brookings. 3 September, http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/.
105 Ernst & Young (2015), Riding the Silk Road :China sees outbound investment boom, May, http://www.ey.com/Publication/
vwLUAssets/ey-china-outbound-investment-report-en/$FILE/ey-china-outbound-investment-report-en.pdf. 
106 KPMG (2015), China Outlook 2015, http://www.kpmg.com/ES/es/Internacionalizacion-KPMG/Documents/China-Outlook-2015.pdf
107 Li Xin (2015), China’s Frugal Oil Companies, The Wall Street Journal, 21 May, http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2015/05/21/why-
chinas-big-oil-companies-have-stopped-big-spending/.
108 IPCC, (2014), Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report Summary for Policymakers, IPCC, September, http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/
assessment-report/ar5/syr/AR5_SYR_FINAL_SPM.pdf. 
109 ‘Planetary boundaries’ refer to the ‘safe operating space’ within which human development can proceed without causing 
irreversible damage to the interlinked biophysical processes that regulate the stability of the ecosystem. See Steffen et al. (2015), 
Planetary Boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet, Science Vol. 347 no. 6223 http://www.sciencemag.org/
content/347/6223/1259855.abstract. 
110 Hance, J. (2013), Head of the IMF: climate change is ‘the greatest economic challenge of the 21st century’, Mongabay, 6 
February, http://news.mongabay.com/2013/02/head-of-imf-climate-change-is-the-greatest-economic-challenge-of-the-21st-century/.
111 China View (2009), Quotable quotes from Chinese president’s tour in U.S, 23 September, http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/2009-09/23/content_12101801.htm. 
112 Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE, 2015; reproduced with kind permission from Lee, B. et al (2012) 
Resources Futures, Chatham House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/187947 . 
113 Commodities Team IMF (2014), Quarterly Review of Commodity Markets, September, http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/
commod/pdf/cqr/cqr0914.pdf.
114 Dobbs et al. (201 1), Resource revolution: Meeting the world’s energy, materials, food, and water needs, McKinsey & Company, 
November, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/energy_resources_materials/resource_revolution.
115 The World Energy Council suggested that use in 2005 was in the order of 1.6 trillion cubic metres, 80% of which was used 
in producing traditional biomass, with 257 billion cubic metres associated with commercial energy and electricity production. 
This compared with Aquastat’s assessment of total freshwater withdrawal of water at a similar period of around 3.8 trillion cubic 
metres. Aquastat further suggested that 0.7 trillion m3 of water are used globally in industrial processes. See World Energy Council 
(2010), Water for Energy 2010, September, http://www.worldenergy.org/publications/2010/water-for-energy-2010/; and Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (2012), Aquastat: FAO’s Information System on Water and Agriculture, 
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm.
116 Rose, K. (2014), The Energy Water Nexus – as seen by the World Energy Council, World Energy Council, 2014, http://iiesi.org/
assets/pdfs/copenhagen_rose.pdf.
117 Withdrawals increase from 106 to 134bcm between 2010 and 2020. See IEA (2012), Water for Energy – Is energy becoming a thirstier 
resource? World Energy Outlook 2012, http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/WEO_2012_Water_Excerpt.pdf.
118 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and FAO (201 1), OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 201 1–2020, 
OECD/FAO, 17 June, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/agr_outlook-201 1-en.
119 IBIS World (201 1), Queensland floods: The economic impact, Special Report, January, https://www.nci.com.au/NCINet/Secure/
Resources/Pdf/QLD_floods_special_report.pdf.
120 See for example, Waughray, D. and Workman, J.G. (eds) (201 1), Water Security: The Water-Food-Energy-Climate Nexus, 
Washington DC: Covelo Press; Hoff, H. (201 1), Understanding the Nexus: Background Paper for the Bonn 201 1 Conference: The 
Water, Energy and Food Security Nexus, Stockholm: Stockholm Environment Institute, p. 5; Andrews-Speed, P ., Bleischwitz, R., 
Boersma, T ., Johnson, C., Kemp, G. and VanDeveer, S. (2012), The Global Resource Nexus: The Struggles for Land, Energy, Food, 
Water, and Minerals, Washington DC: German Marshall Fund; European Report on Development (2012), Confronting Scarcity: 
Managing Water, Energy and Land for Inclusive and Sustainable Growth, Brussels: European Union. Following a high-profile

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
80 
conference on the subject in Bonn in 201 1, the German government, together with a variety of stakeholders, has developed a web-
based platform to promote a number of initiatives, including a three-year action plan by the multilateral development banks on 
water and food security, available at: http://www.water-energy-food.org/en/home.html.
121 Lee, B., Iliev, I. and Preston, F . (2009), Who Owns Our Low Carbon Future? Chatham House, September, 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/public/Research/Energy%2C%20Environment%20and%20Development/
r0909_lowcarbonfuture.pdf.
122 China’s economy grew more than seven-fold between 2000 and 2014, its energy consumption tripled over the same period. 
Chatham House analysis of BP (2015), Statistical Review of World Energy 2015, June, http://www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/
energy-economics/statistical-review-of-world-energy.html and World Bank data (2015), Gross National Income (GNI), http://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/NY .GNP .ATLS.CD. 
123 Chen Liping, Sun Chunqiang, Chen Jing and Li Zheng (2014), An Overview of Current Global Mineral Resource Governance, 
CH-DRC project input paper. 
124 Qu Geping and Li Jinchan (1980), Environmental Management in China, FAO Corporate Document Repository, http://www.fao.
org/docrep/p4150e/p4150e01.htm.
125 Zha Daojiong (2006), China’s Energy Security: Domestic and International Issues, Survival, Vol. 48, no. 1. Spring: 179–190.
126 Kooroshy, J. Preston, P . and Bradley, S. (2014), Cartels and Competition: Challenges to Global Governance, pages 10–12, 
Chatham House, 17 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/cartels-and-competition-minerals-markets-challenges-
global-governance.
127 Hungdah Chiu (1981), China and the Law of the Sea Conference, School of Law University of Maryland, http://digitalcommons.
law.umaryland.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1040&context=mscas.
128 Hungdah Chiu (1981), China and the Law of the Sea Conference, School of Law University of Maryland, http://digitalcommons.
law.umaryland.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1040&context=mscas.
129 The Limits to Growth attempted to predict the impact of resource use, demographic trends; industrialization; pollution; and food 
production on global systems. For an overview see Meadows, D.H. and Meadows, D. (2007), The history and conclusions of The 
Limits to Growth, System Dynamics Review, Volume 23, Issue2–3, pp. 191–197 .
130 Halverson, K. (2004), China’s WTO Accession: Economic, Legal, and Political Implications, Boston College International and 
Comparative Law Review, Volume 27 , Issue 2, http://lawdigitalcommons.bc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1 131&context=iclr.
131 Halverson, K. (2004), China’s WTO Accession: Economic, Legal, and Political Implications, Boston College International and 
Comparative Law Review, Volume 27 , Issue 2, http://lawdigitalcommons.bc.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1 131&context=iclr.
132 Beckman, R. (201 1), China, UNCLOS and the South China Sea, Asian Society of International Law Third Biennial Conference, 
Beijing, China 27–28 August, http://cil.nus.edu.sg/wp/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/AsianSIL -Beckman-China-UNCLOS-and-the-
South-China-Sea-26-July-201 1.pdf.
133 Tow, W.T . (2009), Maritime security: regional versus global implications, Security Politics in the Asia-Pacific: A Regional-Global 
Nexus? New York: Cambridge University Press. 
134 Meng Si (2012), An insight into the green vocabulary of the Chinese communist party, chinadialogue, 15 November, 
https://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/5339-An-insight-into-the-green-vocabulary-of-the-Chinese-communist-party. 
135 Meakin, S. (1992), The Rio Earth Summit: Summary of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, 
Science and Technology Division, November, http://publications.gc.ca/Collection-R/LoPBdP/BP/bp317-e.htm.
136 Chen Gang (2007), The Kyoto Protocol and the Logic of Collective Action, Chinese Journal of International Politics, 1(4): 525–557 , 
http://cjip.oxfordjournals.org/content/1/4/525.full.
137 Chen Gang (2007), The Kyoto Protocol and the Logic of Collective Action, Chinese Journal of International Politics, 1(4): 525–557 , 
http://cjip.oxfordjournals.org/content/1/4/525.full.
138 Stevens, P . et al (2013), Conflict and Coexistence in the Extractive Industries, Chatham House, December, https://www.
chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/public/Research/Energy%2C%20Environment%20and%20Development/chr_coc1 1 13.pdf.
139 Hayward, T . (2009), The centre of gravity in the global energy market has changed and we need to wake up, The Telegraph, 10 
June, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/oilprices/5492000/The-centre-of-gravity-in-the-global-energy-market-has-changed-and-
we-need-to-wake-up.html.
140 Arctic Council (2013), Kiruna Declaration, https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/bitstream/handle/1 1374/93/MM08_Final_Kiruna_
declaration_w_signature.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
141 Campbell, C. (2012), China and the Arctic: Objectives and Obstacles, US-China Economic Security Review Commission Staff 
Research Report, April, http://162.140.209.1/sites/default/files/Research/China-and-the-Arctic_Apr2012.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
81 
142 Beckman, R. (201 1), China, UNCLOS and the South China Sea, Asian Society of International Law Third Biennial Conference, 
Beijing, China 27–28 August, http://cil.nus.edu.sg/wp/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/AsianSIL -Beckman-China-UNCLOS-and-the-
South-China-Sea-26-July-201 1.pdf.
143 Chin Leng Lim and Jiang Yu Wang (2009), China and the DOHA Development Agenda, Working paper presented at the 2009 
World Trade Organization Forum, Geneva. 28 September, http://www.nsi-ins.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/1 1/2009-China-and-the-
Doha-Development-Agenda.pdf.
144 Chinese Embassy in Copenhagen (undated), China’s position and comment on COP15, http://dk.china-embassy.org/eng/ztbd/
tqbh/t646842.htm.
145 Pew Center on Global Climate Change (2009), Fifteenth Session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change and Fifth Session of the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, http://www.c2es.
org/docUploads/copenhagen-cop15-summary.pdf. 
146 Haibin, N. (2013), BRICS in Global Governance- A Progressive and Cooperative Force? Dialogue on Globalization, September, 
http://responsibilitytoprotect.org/FES%20BRICS%20in%20Global%20Governance.pdf. 
147 Armijo, L.E. and Roberts, C. (2014), The Emerging Powers and Global Governance: Why the BRICS Matter? in Looney, R. (ed.), 
Handbook of Emerging Economies, New York: Routledge, http://www.hunter.cuny.edu/polsci/faculty/Roberts/repository/files/
BRICS%20-%20Global%20Governance%20Final%20July%202013%20.pdf.
148 Lee, B. et al (2012), Resources Futures, Chatham House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/
view/187947; Jeonghoi, K. (2010), Recent trends in Export Restrictions, OECD Trade Policy Papers, 19 July, http://www.oecd-ilibrary.
org/trade/recent-trends-in-export-restrictions_5kmbjx63sl27-en?crawler=true. 
149 Australia operated an extensive system of export controls for iron ore, coal and other minerals from the early 1960s in order to 
preserve what were thought to be limited domestic reserves. US restrictions on crude oil exports that were imposed during the Oil 
Shocks are still in place, although are under increasing debate following the shale gas revolution. 
150 Kooroshy, J. Preston, P . and Bradley, S. (2014), Cartels and Competition: Challenges to Global Governance, Chatham House, 17 
December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/cartels-and-competition-minerals-markets-challenges-global-governance.
151 Rusmana, Y . (2015), Indonesia Vows to Stick With Ore Export Curbs as Metals Sink, Bloomberg, 22 September, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-22/indonesia-vows-to-stick-with-ore-export-curbs-as-metals-slump. 
152 Kooroshy, J. Preston, P . and Bradley, S. (2014), Cartels and Competition: Challenges to Global Governance, Chatham House, 17 
December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/cartels-and-competition-minerals-markets-challenges-global-governance.
153 Espa, I. (2015), Strengthening The Global Trade System: Export Restrictions in relation to Extractive Industries, E15 Expert Group 
on Trade and Investment in Extractive Industries (International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development and the World 
Economic Forum), March, http://www.nccr-trade.org/fileadmin/user_upload/nccr-trade.ch/wp5/5.3/Extractive_Industries-EGM1-
Espa_draft_think_piece.pdf. 
154 Lewin, J. and Hume, N. (2015), Bulk commodity shipping rates fall sharply, The Financial Times, 30 January, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/973bdf56-a8a4-1 1e4-ad01-00144feab7de.html.
155 Smyth, J. (2015), Fortescue call for iron-ore output cap sparks regulator review, Financial Times, 25 March, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/49b147d4-d28f-1 1e4-ae91-00144feab7de.html.
156 World Steel Association (2015), World steel Short Range Outlook 2015–2016, 20 April, http://www.worldsteel.org/media-
centre/press-releases/2015/worldsteel-Short-Range-Outlook-2015---2016.html?utm_source=worldsteel+press+releases&utm_
campaign=a55bbd5c75-June_2012_Crude_Steel_Productio.
157 Suga, M. and Suzuki, I. (2015), China’s Peak Steel Demand Threatens to Spark Trade Hostilities, 8 July, http://www.bloomberg.
com/news/articles/2015-07-08/china-s-peak-steel-demand-threatens-to-spark-trade-hostilities.
158 Oliver, C. and Pooler, M. (2015), EU states call for action against China steel dumping, Financial Times, 9 November, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/37f15a42-872b-1 1e5-90de-f44762bf9896.html; Elmquist, S. (2015), Chinese Steel Slapped by 236% U.S. 
Tariff Plan, Bloomberg News, 3 November, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-1 1-03/u-s-commerce-finds-china-steel-
subsidies-of-as-much-as-236-.
159 For in-depth analysis of aluminium warehousing see ‘Warehousing and anti-competitive practices in aluminium markets’ in 
Kooroshy, J. Preston, P . and Bradley, S. (2014), Cartels and Competition: Challenges to Global Governance, Chatham House, 17 
December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/cartels-and-competition-minerals-markets-challenges-global-governance.
160 Richter, J. (2013), MillerCoors Sees Metal-Warehouse Delay Costing Buyers $3 Billion, Bloomberg, Bloomberg, 23 July 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-07-22/lme-rules-seen-by-millercoors-costing-aluminum-buyers-3-billion.html.
161 Farchy, J. (2013), Aluminum producers vent fury at LME changes to warehousing rules, Financial Times, 10 October, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/077171 18-31bf-1 1e3-a16d-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk.

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
82 
162 Home, A. (2014), Qindao scandal casts a long shadow over metal markets, Reuters, 18 December, http://www.reuters.com/
article/2014/12/18/us-qingdao-metals-ahome-idUSKBN0JW18620141218.
163 U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (2014), Wall 
Street Bank Involvement with Physical Commodities, November, http://www.hsgac.senate.gov/subcommittees/investigations/reports.
164 Schaefer, D., Hume, N. and Rice, X. (2015), Barclays fined £26m for trader’s gold rigging, The Financial Times, 23 March, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/08cafa70-e24f-1 1e3-a829-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk.
165 Sanderson, H. (2015), Collapse in premiums hits aluminium trade, Financial Times, 1 September, http://www.ft.com/cms/
s/0/74c7b7e0-4da1-1 1e5-b558-8a9722977189.html. 
166 Bloomberg Business (201 1), China Increases Rare-Earth Export Quota; EU Criticises Move, 15 July, http://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/201 1-07-14/china-almost-doubles-rare-earth-export-quota-in-second-half-after-wto-move.
167 Donnan, S. and Politi, J. (2014), WTO rules against China on ‘rare earths’ export restrictions, The Financial Times, 26 March, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/962a0ba4-b4e6-1 1e3-9166-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=intl#axzz3Nv9D8j00.
168 Donnan, S. and Politi, J. (2014), WTO rules against China on ‘rare earths’ export restrictions, The Financial Times, 26 March, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/962a0ba4-b4e6-1 1e3-9166-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=intl#axzz3Nv9D8j00.
169 Flynn, A. (2014), Glencore Xstrata Sells Las Bambas Mine to Chinese Consortium, The Wall Street Journal, 13 April, 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303887804579499722419173960. 
170 Chatham House (2014), Workshop Summary: Cartels and competition in global minerals markets: Understanding challenges 
and formulating policy responses, Beijing, 5 September 2014. 
171 Volumes traded on the Shanghai Futures Exchange match or exceed those on the LME and NY Comex; see Sanderson, H. and 
Hornby, L. (2015), China funds become new force in global commodity trade, The Financial Times, 20 January, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/a2df3018-9feb-1 1e4-9a74-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk#axzz3W2Km6EHb.
172 Sanderson, H. (2015), Bank of China joins London gold benchmark, 16 June, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cb539396-140c-1 1e5-
9bc5-00144feabdc0.html. 
173 England, A. (2015), ICBC buys stake in Standard Bank’s UK business, Financial Times, 2 February, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/
b4c8903c-aade-1 1e4-91d2-00144feab7de.html. 
174 Hoffman, A. and De Souza, A. (2015), China Filling Warehousing Gap With Purchase of 220-Year-Old Firm, Bloomberg Business, 
14 September, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-14/china-s-cmst-to-buy-majority-stake-in-200-year-old-henry-bath. 
175 Balenieri, R. (2015), China clamours to set global gold prices, Aljazeera, 2 July, http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/
features/2015/06/china-clamours-set-global-gold-prices-150629082056754.html. 
176 Gloystein, H. (2015), Like it or not, China’s crude oil futures will be a global benchmark, Reuters, 10 September, 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/09/10/china-crude-futures-idUSL5N1 1F04A20150910. 
177 Donnan, S. and Kynge, J. (2015), Boost for China as it joins IMF elite, The Financial Times, 1 December, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/d5ac853a-978a-1 1e5-95c7-d47aa298f769.html#slide0.
178 Chatham House Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE, 2015.
179 Statista (2014), Number of pirate attacks on ships in 2014, by ship type, http://www.statista.com/statistics/270084/pirate-attacks-
on-ships-by-ship-type/.
180 Zha, D. (2006), China’s Energy Security: Domestic and International Issues, Survival, Vol. 48, no. 1. Spring: 179–190.
181 Andrews-Speed, P ., Liao, X. and Dannreuther, R. (2009), The Strategic Implications of China’s Energy Needs, Abingdon: Oxford 
University Press.
182 Mitchell, J. (2014), Asia’s Oil: Supply Risks and Pragmatic Remedies, Chatham House, May, https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/
files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20140506Asia’sOilSupplyMitchell.pdf. 
183 International Energy Agency (IEA) (2013), JOINT DECLARATION BY THE IEA AND BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA, INDONESIA, RUSSIA 
AND SOUTH AFRICA ON THE OCCASION OF THE 2013 IEA MINISTERIAL MEETING EXPRESSING MUTUAL INTEREST IN 
PURSUING AN ASSOCIATION, 20 November, http://www.iea.org/media/ministerialpublic/2013/jointdeclaration.pdf. 
184 International Energy Agency (2015), Energy ministers set course for new era at IEA, 18 November, https://www.iea.org/
newsroomandevents/pressreleases/2015/november/energy-ministers-set-course-for-new-era-at-iea-.html. 
185 Birol, F . (2015), OPINION: World benefits if China and IEA can work together, chinadialogue, 16 September, 
https://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/8184-OPINION-World-benefits-if-China-and-IEA-can-work-together.
186 Erickson, A. and Strange, A. (2013), China and the International Antipiracy Effort, 1 November, http://thediplomat.com/2013/1 1/
china-and-the-international-antipiracy-effort/1/.

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
83 
187 Finley, M. (2015), The Oil Market to 2030 – Implications for Investment and Policy, BP Energy Outlook, http://www.bp.com/
content/dam/bp/pdf/energy-economics/energy-outlook-2015/the-oil-market-2030.pdf; Cunningham, N. (2014), China’s Natural Gas 
Demand Set to Triple by 2040, Oil Price.Com, 21 August, http://oilprice.com/Energy/Natural-Gas/Chinas-Natural-Gas-Demand-Set-
to-Triple-by-2040.html.
188 Giugliano, F . (2015), World Bank says fall in oil price is chance to cut fuel subsidies, The Financial Times, 7 January, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/36240cec-95b3-1 1e4-b3a6-00144feabdc0.html.
189 Hornby, L., Raval, A. and Hume, N. (2015), China’s oil imports climb above 7m barrels a day for first time, 13 January, Financial 
Times, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/78f88222-9aff-1 1e4-882d-00144feabdc0.html; Sheppard, D. (2015), China oil imports surpass 
those of US, The Financial Times, 10 May, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/342b3a2e-f5a7-1 1e4-bc6d-00144feab7de.html.
190 Mitchell, J. (2014), Asia’s Oil Supply: Risks and Pragmatic Remedies, May, http://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/
chathamhouse/field/field_document/20140506Asia’sOilSupplyMitchell.pdf. 
191 Hume, N. (2015), Production cuts by Vale and Rio will not solve iron ore glut, The Financial Times, 17 July, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/3e05f76a-2bc5-1 1e5-acfb-cbd2e1c81cca.html; Ailworth, E. (2015), Despite Glut of Oil, Energy Firms Struggle to Turn Off 
the Tap, The Wall Street Journal, 6 August, http://www.wsj.com/articles/despite-glut-of-oil-energy-firms-struggle-to-turn-off-the-
tap-1438904654; Du, J. (2015), Dark days for coal industry as glut worsens, China Daily, 6 May, http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
business/2015-06/05/content_20913188.htm. 
192 Statista (2014), Number of pirate attacks against ships worldwide from 2009 to 2014, http://www.statista.com/statistics/266292/
number-of-pirate-attacks-worldwide-since-2006/.
193 The 2009 Pittsburg Declaration established the G20’s commitment to phase out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies; see G20 (2009), 
Leader’s Statement, The Pittsburgh Summit September 24–25 2009, http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2009/2009communique0925.html. 
The 2013 St. Petersburg Declaration committed to strengthening the IEF’s Joint Organizations Data Initiative (JODI); see G20 (2013), 
G20 Leader’s Declaration, September, http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2013/2013-0906-declaration.html. 
194 Li Xin (2015), China’s Frugal Oil Companies, The Wall Street Journal, 15 May, http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2015/05/21/why-
chinas-big-oil-companies-have-stopped-big-spending/. 
195 Donham, L. et al. ( 2015), Mergers, acquisitions and capital raising in mining and metals, Ernst & Young, http://www.ey.com/
Publication/vwLUAssets/EY -ma-and-capital-raising-in-mining-and-metals/$FILE/EY -ma-and-capital-raising-in-mining-and-metals.pdf. 
196 Bloomberg (2014), Xi Dangles $1.25 Trillion as China Counters U.S. Refocus, 9 November, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2014-1 1-09/president-xi-says-7-percent-gdp-growth-makes-china-top-performer. 
197 The estimate is given in 2012 dollars in IEA (2013), World Energy Outlook 2013, http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/publications/
weo-2013/, p.495.
198 Asian Development Bank Institute (2012), Infrastructure for Supporting Inclusive Growth and Poverty Reduction in Asia, 
Mandaluyong City: Asian Development Bank, http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/29823/infrastructure-supporting-
inclusive-growth.pdf. 
199 The New Climate Economy (2014), Better Growth Better Climate The New Climate Economy Report – The Synthesis Report, 
September, http://2014.newclimateeconomy.report/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/BetterGrowth-BetterClimate_NCE_Synthesis-
Report_web.pdf. 
200 HSBC Global Research (2015), On The Silk Road, Macro China Economics, 21 April, https://www.research.hsbc.com/midas/Res/
RDV?p=pdf&key=TWu0Pqka9m&n=456891.PDF . 
201 In addition to China’s initial $450bn contribution to the AIIB, China has contributed $440bn to its Silk Road Fund, an additional 
$32bn to the China Development Bank and $30bn to the Export-Import Bank of China. See Sheng, A. and Geng, X. (2015), Why 
the AIIB will benefit global governance, World Economic Forum, April 2015, https://agenda.weforum.org/2015/04/why-the-aiib-will-
benefit-global-governance/?utm_content=buffer2b239&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer. 
202 Siddy, D. (2009), Exchanges and sustainable investment, World Federation of Exchanges, August, http://www.world-exchanges.
org/home/index.php/files/18/Studies%20-%20Reports/22/2010%20Exchanges,%20ESG%20&%20Investment%20Decisions.pdf.
203 Ernst & Young (2015), Business risks facing mining and metals 2015–2016, http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY -
business-risks-in-mining-and-metals-2015-2016/$FILE/EY -business-risks-in-mining-and-metals-2015-2016.pdf.
204 Davis, R. and Franks, D.M. (2014), Costs of Company-Community Conflict in the Extractive Sector, Corporate Social 
Responsibility Initiative Report No. 66. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Kennedy School, http://www.hks.harvard.edu/m-rcbg/CSRI/
research/Costs%20of%20Conflict_Davis%20%20Franks.pdf. 
205 World Bank (2013), Toward a Sustainable Energy Future for All: Directions for the World Bank Group’s Energy Sector, 
http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2013/07/17/000456286_20130717103746/Rendered/PD
F/795970SST0SecM00box377380B00PUBLIC0.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
84 
206 The World Bank Treasury (2015), Green Bond Impact Report, June, http://treasury.worldbank.org/cmd/pdf/
WorldBankGreenBondImpactReport.pdf.
207 See Hazan, L. (2015), Norway will make (coal) history, Fossil Free- Divest from Fossil Fuels, 28 May, http://gofossilfree.org/
norway-will-make-coal-history/; Bloomberg (2015), Fossil-Fuel Divestment Gains Momentum With Axa Selling Coal, 22 May, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-05-22/fossil-fuel-divestment-picks-up-momentum-with-axa-selling-coal. 
208 Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) (2015), Consultation Draft – Environmental and Social Framework, 3 August, 
http://www.aiib.org/uploadfile/2015/0907/20150907061253489.pdf. 
209 Santos, L.A. (2015), AIIB releases draft environmental and social safeguards, opens consultations, Devex – International 
Development Network, 16 September, https://www.devex.com/news/aiib-releases-draft-environmental-and-social-safeguards-
opens-consultations-86924. 
210 THE STATE COUNCIL, THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (2015), Premier urges more support for innovation, 
entrepreneurship, 20 October, http://english.gov.cn/premier/news/2015/10/20/content_281475215791276.htm. 
211 This section reproduces, with kind permission from the authors, material from Lee, B. et al (2012), Resources Futures, Chatham 
House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/187947 .
212 Switzerland Global Enterprise (2015), ICT Industry in China, http://www.s-ge.com/sites/default/files/private_files/Marktstudie_
China-the-ICT -Industry-in-China.pdf.
213 Across six energy sectors, Chatham House research found that 1.5% of total patents are co-assigned (i.e. list more than one 
company or institution as co-owners); and 87% of co-assigned patents result from collaboration between companies and/or 
institutions from the same country. See Lee, B. et al (2009), Who Owns our Low Carbon Future? Chatham House, September, 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/109124.
214 Zhao Yinan (2015), China unveils ambitious plans to upgrade manufacturing power, The State Council, 26 March, http://english.
gov.cn/premier/news/2015/03/26/content_281475077781817 .htm.
215 Koh, G.Q. and Yao, K. (2015), China signals ‘new normal’ with higher spending, lower growth target, Reuters, 5 March, 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/03/05/us-china-parliament-idUSKBN0M103W20150305. 
216 Woetzel, J. et al (2014), China’s digital transformation: The Internet’s impact on productivity and growth, p. 1, McKinsey Global 
Institute, July, http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/chinas_digital_transformation. 
217 Development Research Center of the State Council (DRC), (2015), Li Wei: Chinese Companies Boast Great Development Potential 
in the New Normal, March, http://en.drc.gov.cn/2015-03/02/content_19695192.htm. 
218 G20 (2009), Leader’s Statement, The Pittsburgh Summit, 24–25 September 2009, http://www.g20.utoronto.
ca/2009/2009communique0925.html.
219 Japan MOFA (2012), Joint Declaration on the Enhancement of Trilateral Comprehensive Cooperative Partnership, 13 May, 
www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/jck/summit1205/joint_declaration_en.html.
220 Eco-Business (2015), China to use satellites, drones to monitor pollution, 5 August, http://www.eco-business.com/news/china-to-
use-satellites-drones-to-monitor-pollution/.
221 Feng Zhongping and Huang Jin (2014), China’s strategic partnership diplomacy: engaging with a changing world, European 
Strategic Partnerships Observatory, June, http://fride.org/download/WP8_China_strategic_partnership_diplomacy.pdf.
222 Mearsheimer, J. (2014), Can China Rise Peacefully? The National Interest, 25 October, http://nationalinterest.org/commentary/
can-china-rise-peacefully-10204; Glaser, C. (201 1), Will China’s Rise Lead to War? Why Realism Does Not Mean Pessimism, Foreign 
Affairs, Vol. 90, No. 2, pp. 80–91.
223 Rosen, S.P . (2015), How America Can Balance China’s Rising Power in Asia, The Wall Street Journal, 1 June, http://www.wsj.com/
articles/how-america-can-balance-chinas-rising-power-in-asia-1433199409.; Logan, J. (2013), China, America, and the Pivot to Asia, 
Policy Analysis, No, 717 , 8 January, http://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/pa717 .pdf.
224 Dyer, G. and Parker, G. (2015), US attacks UK’s ‘constant accommodation’ with China, The Financial Times, 12 March, 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/31c4880a-c8d2-1 1e4-bc64-00144feab7de.html.
225 Mukherjee, A. (2015), Deepening economic ties belie China-Japan tension, Reuters, 3 September, http://blogs.reuters.com/
breakingviews/2015/09/03/deepening-economic-ties-belie-china-japan-tension/.
226 President Xi Jinping (2015), Towards a Community of Common Destiny and A New Future for Asia, delivered at the Boao Forum 
for Asia Annual Conference, 28 March, http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2015-03/29/c_134106145.htm.
227 UN Security Council (2013), Report of the UN Secretary-General to the Security Council (S/2013/7), 7 January [10], [37], 
http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/2013/7 . 
228 Bailey, R., Ford, J., Brown, O. and Bradley, S. (2015), Investing in Stability: Can Extractive-Sector Development Help Build Peace?, 
Chatham House, June, www.chathamhouse.org/publication/extractive-sector-development#sthash.XWtogB1s.dpuf.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
85 
229 Navarro, P . and Autry, G. (201 1), Death by China: Confronting the Dragon- A Global Call to Action, Upper Saddle River: Pearson 
Education Inc.; Lee, J. (2012), China’s Geostrategic Search for Oil, The Washington Quarterly, 35L3, pp. 75–92, http://csis.org/files/
publication/twq12SummerLee.pdf.
230 Blumenthal, D. (2007), Is China at Present (or Will China Become) a Responsible Stakeholder in the International Community? 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 2007; 19–24; Alves, A.C. (2014) China’s Economic Statecraft in Africa: Continuity and 
Change, Harvard Asia Quarterly, Spring 2014.
231 Moran, T .H. (2010), China’s Strategy to Secure Natural Resources: Risks, Dangers, and Opportunities, Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, July 2010; Economy, E. and Levi, M. (2014), By All Means Necessary: How China’s Resource Quest is 
Changing the World, OUP 2014. 
232 See for example Addax Petroleum (2014), Addax Petroleum announced the signature of a new partnership with the Gabonese 
Republic, 16 January, https://www.addaxpetroleum.com/about-us/news and Bowman, A. (2013), Zambia: troubled Chinese coal 
mine loses licence, FT beyondbrics, 20 February, http://blogs.ft.com/beyond-brics/2013/02/20/zambia-chinese-mining-licences-
revoked/#axzz2tbFIe1jl. 
233 Breslin, S. (2012), Access: China’s Resource Foreign Policy, LSE IDEAS, http://www.lse.ac.uk/IDEAS/publications/reports/pdf/
SR012/breslin.pdf.
234 U.S. Energy Information Administration (2014), World Oil Transit Chokepoints, US EIA, November, http://www.eia.gov/beta/
international/analysis_includes/special_topics/World_Oil_Transit_Chokepoints/wotc.pdf.
235 Metelitsa, A. and Kupfer, J. (2014), Oil and Gas Resources and Transit Issues in the South China Sea, Asia Society Policy Institute 
Issue Brief, http://asiasociety.org/files/SouthChinaSea_OilGas_brief.pdf.
236 Colquhoun, A. (2015), China’s Silk Road plan is already taking shape, Financial Times, April, http://blogs.ft.com/beyond-
brics/2015/04/15/chinas-silk-road-plan-is-already-taking-shape/.
237 Chatham House analysis of USGS Commodity Statistics and Information, 2014, available at http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/
pubs/commodity/.
238 Van der Putten, F . and Meijnders, M. (2015), China, Europe and the Maritime Silk Road, Clingendael: Netherlands Institute of 
International Relations, March, http://www.clingendael.nl/sites/default/files/China%20Europe%20and%20the%20Maritime%20
Silk%20Road.pdf.
239 Hornby, L. (2015), China’s ‘One Belt One Road’ plan greeted with caution, Financial Times, 20 November, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/2/5c022b50-78b7-1 1e5-933d-efcdc3c1 1c89.html#axzz3t3wMRzZC; Weijia, H. (2015), New fund initiated for Silk Roads, Global 
Times, 25 January, http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/903900.shtml.
240 Zhou, J., Hallding, K. and Han, G. (2015), The trouble with China’s ‘One Belt One Road’ strategy’, China Dialogue, 29 July, https://
www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/8001-The-trouble-with-China-s-One-Belt-One-Road-strategy.
241 See Hornby, L. (2015), China seeks to forge foreign demand for its industrial output, Financial Times, 26 January, 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/e8216b60-a152-1 1e4-8d19-00144feab7de.html#axzz3mB47ZVRU; Zhou, J., Hallding, K., and Han, G. 
(2015), The Trouble With China’s ‘One Belt One Road’ Strategy, The Diplomat, 26 June, http://thediplomat.com/2015/06/the-trouble-
with-the-chinese-marshall-plan-strategy/. 
242 Stephens, P . (2015), China spurs Narendra Modi’s pivot to Washington, Financial Times, 8 October, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/18e47c9a-6ced-1 1e5-8171-ba1968cf791a.html#axzz3oMbVMCTl; Nataraj, G. (2015), Why India Should Join China’s New 
Maritime Silk Road, The Diplomat, 3 July, http://thediplomat.com/2015/07/why-india-should-join-chinas-new-maritime-silk-road/.
243 South China Morning Post (2014), Foreign Minister Wang Yi lobbies Jakarta to back ‘maritime Silk Road’, 10 November, 
http://www.scmp.com/news/asia/article/1632067/foreign-minister-wang-yi-lobbies-jakarta-back-maritime-silk-road.
244 Asian Development Bank (2014), Establishment of the Asia Pacific Project Preparation Facility, October, http://www.adb.org/sites/
default/files/institutional-document/149528/r1 16-14.pdf.
245 AIIB (2015), What is the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank?, http://www.aiib.org/html/aboutus/AIIB/.
246 Rashid, A. (2015), It will take silky diplomacy to build China’s new road, The Financial Times, 25 June, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/
d14a00e4-15d0-1 1e5-a58d-00144feabdc0.html.
247 Rashid, A. (2015), It will take silky diplomacy to build China’s new road, The Financial Times, 25 June, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/
d14a00e4-15d0-1 1e5-a58d-00144feabdc0.html.
248 Saeed, A. (2015), China billions drive Pakistan coal power expansion, Climate Home, 2 June, http://www.climatechangenews.
com/2015/06/02/china-billions-drive-pakistan-coal-power-expansion/.
249 See Abdenur, A.E. (2014), BRICS and Global Governance Reform: A Two-Pronged Approach, Papers of the Fifth BRICS Academic 
Forum Partnership for Development, Integration & Industrialisation, http://www.academia.edu/7683896/BRICS_and_Global_
Governance_Reform_a_Two-Pronged_Approach_Papers_of_the_BRICS_Academic_Forum_2014_; Downie, C. (2015), Global energy 
governance: do the BRICs have the energy to drive reform? International Affairs, 91:4, 799–812.

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
86 
250 Harding, R. (2014), G20 gives US ultimatum over IMF reform, The Financial Times, 1 1 April, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/eb06deb2-
c1b7-1 1e3-83af-00144feabdc0.html.
251 Narlikar, A. (2010), New powers: how to become one and how to manage them, New York: Colombia University Press. 
252 Angola accounts for the lion’s share of this figure, with trade worth $31bn. A further seven countries including Zambia, Yemen, 
South Sudan, Equatorial Guinea, Mauritania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone account for over $1bn, and 
a further six for over $100mn, including Myanmar, Laos, Tanzania, Liberia, Madagascar and Rwanda. Based on 2013 data from 
CH Resource Trade Database, UN COMTRADE. See http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/policy/cdp/ldc/ldc_list.pdf for Least 
Developed Countries in 2014.
253 Evan Ellis, R. (2014), China on the Ground in Latin America: Challenges for the Chinese and Impacts on the Region, Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
254 Bremner, I. (2013), The underappreciated tensions between China and Brazil, Reuters, 28 May, http://blogs.reuters.com/ian-
bremmer/2013/05/28/the-underappreciated-tensions-between-china-and-brazil/. 
255 Zhao Yinan (2015), Li pledges $ 30b industrial fund for Latin America, 20 May, China Daily, http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/
world/2015-05/20/content_20768034_2.htm.
256 Lee, B. et al. (2015) Enhancing Engagement Between China and the EU on Resource Governance and Low-Carbon 
Development, Chatham House and E3G, July, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/eu-china-cooperation-engagement.
257 Japan MOFA (2013), Joint Declaration on the Enhancement of Trilateral Comprehensive Cooperative Partnership, 13 May 2012 
Beijing, China, www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/jck/summit1205/joint_declaration_en.html.
258 International Monetary Fund (IMF) (2015), IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde Welcomes U.S. Congressional Approval 
of the 2010 Quota and Governance Reforms, Press Release No. 15/573, 18 December, http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2015/
pr15573.htm.
259 The White House (2015), Remarks by President Obama and President Xi of the People’s Republic of China in Joint Press 
Conference, 25 September, https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/09/25/remarks-president-obama-and-president-xi-
peoples-republic-china-joint.
260 White, H. (2013), The China Choice: Why We Should Share Power, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013, p. 51.
261 Chen Liping, Sun Chunqiang, Chen Jing and Li Zheng (2014), An Overview of Current Global Mineral Resource Governance, 
CH-DRC Project input paper.
262 Lee, B. et al (2012), Resources Futures, Chatham House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/
view/187947 .
263 For the role of signalling in strategic relations and negotiations in particular, see Morrow, J.D. (1999), The Strategic Setting of 
Choices: Signalling, Commitment and Negotiation in International Politics in David A. Lake and Robert Powell (eds), Strategic 
Choice and International Relations, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999, pp. 77–1 14. The ability of the United States to 
both signal to, and read the intentions of, the Soviet Union during the early Cold War years, for example, was greatly enhanced 
by Washington’s earlier investment in the United Nations according to Seth Weinberger. See, Weinberger, S. (2003), Institutional 
Signaling and the Origins of the Cold War, Security Studies, 12:4, 2003, pp. 80–1 15. See also Wolf, R. (2014), Rising Powers, 
Status Ambitions, and the Need to Reassure: What China Could Learn from Imperial Germany’s Failures, The Chinese Journal of 
International Politics, 7:2, 2014, pp. 185–219. 
264 Kooroshy, J. Preston, P . and Bradley, S. (2014), Cartels and Competition: Challenges to Global Governance, Chatham House, 17 
December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publication/cartels-and-competition-minerals-markets-challenges-global-governance.
265 See Mitchell, J. (2014), Asia’s Oil: Supply Risks and Pragmatic Remedies, Chatham House, May, https://www.chathamhouse.org/
sites/files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20140506Asia’sOilSupplyMitchell.pdf. 
266 EITI (2015), Chinese Companies Reporting in EITI Countries – Review of the Engagement of Chinese Firms in Countries 
implementing the EITI, EITI International Secretariat, March, https://eiti.org/files/EITI-Brief_Chinese-companies-reporting.pdf. 
267 The Energy Charter Treaty provides clear WTO-style arrangements for energy, including for transit pipelines, with recourse to 
binding dispute settlement processes. See Energy Charter (2015), International Energy Charter Consolidated Energy Charter Treaty, 
July, http://www.energycharter.org/fileadmin/DocumentsMedia/Legal/ECTC-en.pdf. 
268 Ruff, D., Belcher, J. and Golsong, C. (2014), Energy Charter Treaty, Norton Rose Fulbright, 2014, http://www.nortonrosefulbright.
com/files/energy-charter-treaty-1 1591 1.pdf; Zhang, S. (2012), Energy Charter Treaty and China: Member of Bystander? Journal of 
World Investment & Trade, 13(4): 597–617 , http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2062836.
269 Stevens, P . et al (2013), Conflict and Coexistence in the Extractive Industries, Chatham House Report, December, 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/public/Research/Energy%2C%20Environment%20and%20
Development/chr_coc1 1 13.pdf.
270 Reuters (2014), China to establish $40 billion Silk Road infrastructure fund, Reuters, 8 November, http://www.reuters.com/
article/2014/1 1/08/us-china-diplomacy-idUSKBN0IS0BQ20141 108.

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
Navigating the New Normal: China and Global Resource Governance 
A joint DRC and Chatham House report
87 
271 Analysis by John Mitchell using JODI and BP statistics. See Mitchell, J. (2014), Asia’s Oil: Supply Risks and Pragmatic Remedies, 
Chatham House, May, www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/field/field_document/20140506Asia’sOilSupplyMitchell.pdf.
272 See, for example, Tiezzi, S. (2014), Saudi Arabia, China’s ‘Good Friend’, The Diplomat, 14 March, http://thediplomat.com/2014/03/
saudi-arabia-chinas-good-friend/; Keck, Z. (2014), China Calls Iran a ‘Strategic Partner’, 6 May, The Diplomat, http://thediplomat.
com/2014/05/china-calls-iran-a-strategic-partner/; Rakhmat, M.Z. (2014), Exploring the China and Oman Relationship, 10 May, 
http://thediplomat.com/2014/05/exploring-the-china-and-oman-relationship/.
273 Wroe. D, (2014), David Johnston backs Chuck Hagel: China destabilising South China Sea, 2 June, http://www.smh.com.au/
federal-politics/political-news/david-johnston-backs-chuck-hagel-china-destabilising-south-china-sea-20140601-39cgz.html. 
274 Freed, J. (2014), Chinese press FIRB to relax coal promise, 6 January, The Australian Financial Review, http://www.brw.com.au/p/
business/companies/chinese_press_firb_to_relax_coal_h8erYgiiKTsfIzBSNfFG1I.
275 See, for example, McCarthy, S. (2012), NEXEN-CNOOC Political storm brews in U.S. over Nexen deal, Globe and Mail, 28 September, 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/international-business/political-storm-brews-in-us-over-nexen-deal/article4570674/. 
276 Xinhuanet (2014), China eyes 500-bln-USD annual trade with LatAm in 10 years, Xinhuanet, 18 July, http://news.xinhuanet.com/
english/china/2014-07/18/c_133493879.htm. 
277 Swain, M.D. (2014), Xi Jinping’s July 2014 Trip to Latin America, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 5 September, 
http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/09/05/xi-jinping-s-july-2014-trip-to-latin-america. 
278 Evan Ellis, R. (2014), China on the Ground in Latin America: Challenges for the Chinese and Impacts on the Region, Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
279 Bremner, I. (2014), The underappreciated tensions between China and Brazil, Reuters, 28 May, http://blogs.reuters.com/ian-
bremmer/2013/05/28/the-underappreciated-tensions-between-china-and-brazil/. 
280 Lee, B. et al (2012), Resources Futures, Chatham House, 1 December, https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/
view/187947 .
281 Singhal, R. (2015), India-China Deficit: Beyond Iron Ore, The Diplomat, 12 June, http://thediplomat.com/2015/06/india-china-
deficit-beyond-iron-ore/. 
282 Das, K.N. and Dash, J. (2014), India rejects call to ban iron ore exports from Odisha, Reuters, 12 February, http://in.reuters.com/
article/2014/02/12/india-ironore-odisha-idINDEEA1B08X20140212.
283 Bose, K. (2015), Shouldn’t India, like China, consider buying Australian iron ore assets? Business Standard, 15 June, http://www.
business-standard.com/article/markets/shouldn-t-india-like-china-consider-buying-australian-iron-ore-assets-1 15061600028_1.html 
284 Crabtree, J. and Farchy, J. (2013), Indian iron ore sector faces torrid time, Financial Times, 19 February, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/c25abe2c-7a94-1 1e2-9cc2-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk#axzz2wOmlAaze.
285 Bland, B. (2014), Indonesia slaps ban on mineral exports, Financial Times, 12 January, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d643e66e-7b71-
1 1e3-a2da-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2wPNORRpN.
286 Bland, B. (2014), Indonesia slaps ban on mineral exports, Financial Times, 12 January, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d643e66e-7b71-
1 1e3-a2da-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2wPNORRpN.
287 Platts (2014), China’s nickel ore prices may rise more than 50% on Indonesian export ban: Macquarie, Platts, 15 January, 
http://www.platts.com/latest-news/metals/singapore/chinas-nickel-ore-prices-may-rise-more-than-50-27826731.
288 Davis, A. (2014), Nickel Seen Extending Rally Into 2015 by CLSA on Ore Stocks Fall, Bloomberg Business, 12 December, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-12-12/nickel-seen-extending-rally-into-2015-by-clsa-on-ore-stocks-fall.
289 Davis, A. (2015), Biggest Nickel Producer Can’t Mine Enough to Satisfy China, Bloomberg Business, 30 April, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-30/world-s-top-nickel-producer-can-t-mine-enough-to-satisfy-china. 
290 Odera, C. (2014), UPDATE 1-Recovery of South Sudan oil output to take time – official, Reuters, 19 March, http://in.reuters.com/
article/2014/03/19/southsudan-oil-idINL6N0MG30H20140319.
291 Yuwen Wu (2014), China’s oil fears over South Sudan fighting, BBC News Africa, 8 January, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-
africa-25654155.
292 U.S. Energy Information Administration (2013), Sudan and South Sudan, 5 September, http://www.eia.gov/countries/cab.
cfm?fips=su. 
293 Odera, C. (2014), UPDATE 1-Recovery of South Sudan oil output to take time –official, Reuters, 19 March, http://in.reuters.com/
article/2014/03/19/southsudan-oil-idINL6N0MG30H20140319.
294 Gridneff, I. (2015), South Sudan Oil Field Becomes Battleground as Economy Reels, Bloomberg Business, 25 May, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-05-25/south-sudan-oil-field-becomes-key-battleground-as-economy-reels. 
295 See Ngor, M. (2014), South Sudan Evacuating Foreign Workers From Oil-Rich State, Bloomberg Business, 21 February, 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-02-21/south-sudan-evacuating-foreign-oil-workers-from-upper-nile-state.

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
The Royal Institute of International Affairs 
Chatham House 
10 St James’s Square, London SW1Y 4LE 
T +44 (0)20 7957 5700 F +44 (0)20 7957 5710 
contact@chathamhouse.org www.chathamhouse.org
Charity Registration Number: 208223
Development Research Center of the State Council of the People’s 
Republic of China 
225 Chaoyangmennei Avenue, Dongcheng District,
Beijing 100010, China
T : 86 (10) 65236066 F: 86 (10) 65236060
drc@drc.gov.cn en.drc.gov.cn
The Development Research Center of the State Council (DRC) conducts research on 
strategic, long-term issues in China’s economic and social development.
Chatham House, the Royal Institute of International Affairs, is an independent policy 
institute based in London. Our mission is to help build a sustainably secure, prosperous 
and just world.
Chatham House does not express opinions of its own. The opinions expressed in this 
publication are the responsibility of the authors.
© The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2016
ISBN 978 1 78413 102 9
This publication is printed on recycled paper.
