
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Research 
Paper
The case for expanding 
digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology 
can serve citizens, preserve 
sovereignty and save money 
Rowan Wilkinson, Alex Krasodomski and Isabella Wilkinson
Digital Society 
Programme 
October 2025

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Chatham House, the Royal Institute of International 
Affairs, is a world-leading policy institute based in London. 
Our mission is to help governments and societies build 
a sustainably secure, prosperous and just world.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
1 Chatham House
Contents
 Summary 2
01 Introduction 4
02 What is DPI? 7
03 Sovereignty 10
04 Economic opportunity 14
05 Resilience and security 18
06 Public sector modernization 21
07 Global DPI collaboration 24
08 Conclusion and recommendations 27
 Annex 1 32
 About the authors 33
 Acknowledgments 34

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
2 Chatham House
Summary
 — Digital services are critical to the management of government budgets, 
the modernization of societies and economic growth. This transformation has 
the potential to boost efficiency, reduce spending, and improve accessibility 
and inclusion for citizens. However, to date, efforts in this direction have been 
characterized by high costs, long-term dependence on foreign service providers 
and siloed projects that result in duplication and waste. Creating a digital 
society that can unlock new public goods requires an urgent and comprehensive 
reset of strategic thinking and approach.
 — Digital public infrastructure (DPI) is a way of building society-scale digital 
systems that can overcome some of the past issues encountered in the 
digitalization process by adhering to a few key principles. These include only 
initiating open, public-interest digital solutions that are interoperable with 
other systems, that can be built upon and that enable the secure sharing of data. 
Common examples of DPI include digital identity systems, digital payment 
systems and data exchange systems. The term DPI refers both to the approach 
and principles behind open, interoperable digitalization, and to the resulting 
digital systems and platforms that add infrastructural capability. 
 — The principles of DPI offer five key benefits for governments looking to build 
robust digital foundations:
 — Sovereignty: DPI approaches aim to counter foreign dependencies and 
vendor lock-in, while allowing more scope for national principles and values 
to shape and inform society-scale technology.
 — Economic opportunity: By replacing expensive, proprietary and siloed 
digital services with open, interoperable components that can share data, 
DPI can increase bureaucratic efficiency, boost access to credit, improve 
tax collection, lower costs for businesses, and provide a foundation for 
local innovation.
 — Resilience and security: DPI can safeguard national security by reducing 
reliance on foreign-controlled proprietary systems, as well as by ensuring 
that critical digital infrastructure remains sovereign, auditable and resilient 
against geopolitical coercion or cyberattacks.
 — Public sector modernization: Digital public service delivery is proven 
to boost efficiency and user satisfaction. DPI can facilitate a ‘whole-of-
government’ approach that securely enables government departments 
to share data, and citizens to access a wide range of services through 
a single interface.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
3 Chatham House
 — Global collaboration: Interoperability enables nations to share and jointly 
govern digital infrastructure – offering new diplomatic and cooperation 
opportunities amid divergent geopolitical interests and values.
 — Countries without robust digital infrastructure may increasingly find themselves 
uncompetitive and unable to deliver essential public services. Overwhelmingly, 
digitalization is the preferred government approach to improve public and private 
services. However, adoption is not linear. As with all technology, the function and 
intention behind each system or platform are essential. Some applications of DPI 
can bring negative implications for rights and civil liberties, with risks including 
intrusive surveillance of citizens and the misuse of private data, particularly for 
the populations of authoritarian states. Therefore, transparency, democratic 
oversight and strong legal safeguards are vital for successful DPI that protects 
citizens and provides efficient public and private service delivery.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4 Chatham House
01 
Introduction
Robust digital systems that can deliver efficient and reliable 
services are a priority for governments around the world. 
Digital public infrastructure offers a comprehensive route 
to achieving this goal.
In pursuit of efficient and reliable public services, governments across the 
globe have long attempted to harness the potential of digital technology. However, 
this agenda is no longer simply a modernization effort to cut bureaucracy and costs. 
It is now a strategic necessity particularly in a world where digital sovereignty, 
resilience, economic autonomy and alternatives to the technological dominance 
of the US and China are increasingly important.
Past approaches to this modernization process have often resulted in siloed and 
inflexible digital solutions. The digital public infrastructure (DPI) concept can 
facilitate a more comprehensive approach to foundational digitalization that 
enables the provision of modern public and private services, such as healthcare, 
tax collection and local authority services. Common principles – interoperability, 1 
the flexibility to be updated and built upon, and the ability to securely share data – 
are central to successful examples of such DPI systems. The term DPI here means the 
principles behind this strategy as well as the resulting digital systems and platforms. 
A number of countries including Brazil, Estonia, India and Singapore are pioneers 
of robust, modern digital infrastructures that promise a two-fold benefit: a state 
and economy able to leverage government assets using the latest technology, and 
a path towards reducing the geopolitical strategic vulnerabilities and dependencies 
prevalent in current technology approaches.
Facing the challenges of sluggish economic growth and increasingly antiquated 
bureaucracies, today’s decision-makers are vocal in their support of new technology 
solutions, referred to here as their technology stack: a collection of technical systems 
and software used together to implement digital applications. The emergence 
1 Interoperability means that two services, even when created or operated by different companies or organizations, 
can connect together. By way of example, an email client provided by Google can send emails to one provided 
by Microsoft or by Proton: these solutions are interoperable. By contrast, a Facebook user cannot send messages 
or share data between Facebook and X or YouTube. They are not interoperable.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
5 Chatham House
of AI in particular has accelerated government plans for technological transitions 
around the world. For example, the UK’s recent AI Opportunities Action plan 
promises to drive economic growth and modernize public services. 2 For many 
countries, the process of modernizing the state, society and the economy has taken 
on a new urgency in the context of a fast-changing global order, in which the pace 
of technology development in the US and China has the potential to expose other 
countries to risks related to dependency and a lack of alternatives.
Single points of technological failure and international tensions are emerging, 
with catastrophic, global consequences when things go wrong.
In July 2024, an alleged outage caused by a botched update to a single piece 
of software operated by Crowdstrike disrupted airlines, hospitals, banks and media 
organizations across the world, causing an estimated $10 billion worth of damage 
in hours. 3 Elsewhere, the Ukrainian military’s reliance on Starlink satellite internet 
has prompted questions about operational reliability, with reported uncertainties 
over coverage and access during the conflict. The service operates under terms set 
by the US provider, which has imposed restrictions on certain uses in Crimea. This 
situation underscores the broader importance of diverse communication channels 
for government operations and civilian outreach during wartime.4
The central role of giant digital platforms in search and social media has historically 
been approached as a regulatory challenge by countries. But public disagreements 
between tech giants and nation states, and a creeping sense of values misalignment, 
has raised the question of whether countries have sufficient sway over these vital 
pieces of political, cultural and information infrastructure. Speaking during the 
2024 US presidential election campaign, JD Vance threatened to withdraw 
the US from NATO should member states continue to attempt to regulate 
speech on US social media platforms. 5
2 UK Department for Science, Innovation and Technology (2025), AI Opportunities Action Plan, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/ai-opportunities-action-plan/ai-opportunities-action-plan.
3 Alegre, S. (2024), ‘The CrowdStrike Outage Shows How Vulnerable We Have Become’, Centre for International 
Governance Innovation, 21 August 2024, https://www.cigionline.org/articles/the-crowdstrike-outage-shows- 
how-vulnerable-we-have-become.
4 Pollet, M. (2025), ‘Ukraine is stuck with Musk’s Starlink for now’, Politico, 7 April 2025, https://www.politico.eu/
article/ukraine-stuck-with-elon-musk-starlink-satellite-internet.
5 Kilander, G. (2024), ‘JD Vance says US could drop support for NATO if Europe tries to regulate Elon Musk’s 
platforms’, Independent, 17 September 2024, https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/
jd-vance-elon-musk-x-twitter-donald-trump-b2614525.html; Kaplan, J. (2025), ‘More Speech and Fewer Mistakes’, 
META, press release, 7 January 2025, https://about.fb.com/news/2025/01/meta-more-speech-fewer-mistakes.
Public disagreements between tech giants 
and nation states, and a creeping sense of values 
misalignment, has raised the question of whether 
countries have sufficient sway over these vital 
pieces of political, cultural and information 
infrastructure.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
6 Chatham House
For Western democracies, the scramble to realign with and respond to the changing 
priorities of the US administration under President Donald Trump has prompted 
a growing fear, one shared by most sovereign nations: the digital foundations 
on which they rely – economically, politically and culturally – are shaky and 
alternatives are urgently required.
Current digitalization strategies – which tend to be costly, dependent on foreign 
service providers, siloed, outsourced, vertically-integrated, extractive, and usually 
built elsewhere and hammered into shape through regulation – are unfit for a world 
where the sovereignty and capacity of states for technological governance are 
at a historically high premium. Add to this tight domestic and development 
budgets and drives for government efficiency, and it is clear that a new approach 
to digitalization is essential.
While for some in Europe this realization has been sudden – seen in the frantic 
activity around plans for a technological solution for digital infrastructure in the 
form of ‘EuroStack’, for instance – the same is not true for other countries. 6 
Alternative ways to build society-scale technology have been piloted, tested, 
resourced, refined and championed by leaders in India, Brazil, Kenya, Tanzania, 
Togo and elsewhere. A number of factors have played a part in the choices these 
countries made in their approaches to DPI, including concerns over high costs 
(as demonstrated by government IT spend in OECD countries, which is 20-times 
higher than it is outside of the organization); 7 the threat of technology dependency 
and resulting desire for national tech champions (advocates of new technology); 
or the urgent need to modernize states and economies, particularly in the wake 
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
For countries exploring new approaches to technology governance and provision, 
these strategies and the technologies that underpin them – loosely grouped as DPI – 
can provide a path forward that is tested, modern, scalable, cooperative and 
immediately available. However, any DPI implementation must carefully address 
fundamental civil liberty concerns including data privacy, surveillance risks and the 
protection of anonymity. Essential safeguards include robust feedback mechanisms, 
government transparency and clear avenues for public redress – all critical for 
maintaining democratic legitimacy and public trust.
There is a difficult balance to manage. On the one hand, governments risk 
undermining their sovereignty by becoming overdependent on foreign technology 
providers. On the other hand, poorly equipped government services that fail 
to leverage modern technology can create and exacerbate their own governance 
challenges and leave citizens underserved.
When designed and implemented with strong democratic principles, DPI approaches 
represent both a path towards state and economic modernization and a strategic 
response to the technology sovereignty challenge that has emerged over the past 
25 years – an issue brought so sharply into focus for Europeans since the beginning 
of the second Trump administration.
6 EuroStack (undated), ‘Building Europe’s digital future’, https://euro-stack.eu.
7 Eaves, D. (2024), ‘Lessons from digital public infrastructure’, lecture, Public AI Seminar, University College 
London, 20 February 2024.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
7 Chatham House
02 
What is DPI?
Digital public infrastructure refers to both the technological 
components of the digital transition as well as the underlying 
principles and approach. Successful DPI demands society-scale 
technology solutions that are interoperable, that can be built 
upon and that enable the sharing of data.
DPI is a comprehensive approach to building society-scale digital systems that 
can boost economic opportunities and enable better public services. The aim is to 
resolve disjointed and disparate elements of digital systems and platforms, and 
to improve the experience of service delivery through better efficiency and ease 
of use. 8 The concept was formally recognized by the UN and the G20 in 2023, and 
currently informs the digitalization strategies of around 60 nations, including 
Argentina, Bangladesh, Colombia, Ghana, Indonesia, the Philippines, Rwanda 
and Saudi Arabia.9
DPI has emerged as an alternative to traditional approaches to building 
digital services, in which a vendor is contracted to provide a single, siloed 
solution – e.g. digital identity verification – that often cannot then be built upon, 
connected to other digital solutions, or be operated independent of the original 
vendor (Figure 1).
The traditional approach has led to vendors duplicating the same systems across 
governments around the world, though independently of one another, resulting 
in higher costs, siloed services and waste. The UK is replete with examples of costly 
duplication, vendor lock-in and inefficiency in the country’s approach to digital 
transformation. The digitalization of the National Health Service (NHS) – 
a seemingly never-ending struggle in the UK – continues to be hampered by 
fragmentation throughout its technology ecosystems: with different electronic 
8 Massally, K. N., Matthan, R. and Chaudhuri, R. (2023), ‘What is the DPI Approach?’, Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, 15 May 2023, https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2023/05/what-is-the-dpi-
approach?lang=en.
9 G20, Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI) and World Bank (2023), G20 Policy Recommendations 
for Advancing Financial Inclusion and Productivity Gains through Digital Public Infrastructure: Global Partnership 
for Financial Inclusion, https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099092023121016458/pdf/
P178703046f82d07c0bbc60b5e474ea7841.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
8 Chatham House
patient record systems in use across different NHS trusts, which prevents the 
sharing of data, trusts easily switching providers, or system expansion or updates. 10 
Attempts to create a single integrated NHS record that is accessible by other digital 
systems failed in 2011. The project was described by MPs as one of the ‘worst 
and most expensive contracting fiascos’ in public sector history. 11 Furthermore, 
the collapse of technology providers (e.g. UKCloud) on whom whole systems 
were dependent led to continuity crises and millions of pounds in underwriting, 
ultimately paid by the UK taxpayer. 12
Figure 1. Traditional digitalization approach vs a DPI approach
Source: Compiled by the authors. 
Note: Under the traditional digitalization approach vendors repeatedly duplicate systems leading to high 
costs and siloed and inconsistent services. A DPI approach provides reuseable ‘building blocks’ that any digital 
service (public or private) can use.
In the US, COVID-19 pandemic relief was hampered by siloed state systems, some 
of which were nearly 50 years old, leading to ‘rampant fraud’ and delays in aid. 13 
Meanwhile, the commissioning of a healthcare portal by the state of Oregon 
10 Lawrence, A., Krelle, H., Horton, T. and Gerhold, M. (2025), Electronic patient records: why the NHS urgently 
needs a strategy to reap the benefits, The Health Foundation, https://www.health.org.uk/reports-and-analysis/
analysis/electronic-patient-records-nhs-strategy.
11 BBC News (2013), ‘NHS IT system one of ‘worst fiascos ever’, say MPs’, 18 September 2013, 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-24130684.
12 Clark, L. (2025), ‘How the collapse of local cloud provider caused biz continuity issues in UK government’, 
The Register, 3 March 2025, https://www.theregister.com/2025/03/03/collapse_of_ukcloud_hurt_govt.
13 US House of Representatives (2024), After Action Review of the COVID-19 Pandemic: The Lessons Learned and 
a Path Forward, 4 December 2024, https://oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/12/12.04.202
4-SSCP-FINAL-REPORT.pdf.
Traditional digitalization approach
User messaging Identity verification Digital payments Data exchange
Local authority services
Tax collection
Digital healthcare
DPI approach
User messaging Identity verification Digital payments Data exchange
Local authority services
Tax collection
Digital healthcare

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
9 Chatham House
encapsulates the challenge of traditional approaches to digitalization: not only did 
the provider fail to deliver a functioning service, but the siloed solution was only 
understood by that single provider, leaving the state locked into that vendor.14
The DPI approach, by contrast, requires solutions that are interoperable, that can 
be built upon, and that enable data to be shared. 15 While this more comprehensive 
approach is favoured for sovereignty, resilience, security, international cooperation, 
modernization and economic gains, it does require large-scale data collection and 
storage, which poses inevitable but preventable risks to digital privacy and rights 
protection. To combat these risks, facilitators must support and implement strong 
legal and policy safeguards, privacy-enhancing technology, governance mechanisms 
for accountability, bias and inclusion provisions, and global standards.
India’s Aadhar digital identity system is an example of the DPI approach to creating 
robust systems for public service provision. Rather than commissioning a single 
vendor to provide a digital ID solution, the Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) created an open system. As a result, a range of public and private actors can 
complete the task of verifying a citizen’s identity and providing users with a 12-digit 
ID number. That number can then be used for various other services, both public 
(e.g. tax filings, welfare payments and vaccination roll-outs) and private (e.g. the 
verification of ID by banks and telecoms providers, employee background checks and 
digital payments). Critically, this allows any future public or private services to forgo 
building an ID solution from scratch, piggybacking instead on Aadhar.
While initially coined to describe a handful of technologies built in this open 
way, the definition of the term DPI has expanded to also include global digital 
infrastructure like the internet and GPS. What one government or business 
considers a vital piece of digital infrastructure might differ from another: critical 
to the DPI approach is providing solutions that are open and available for others 
to use. Switching from siloed solutions to digital services built from interoperable 
blocks represents a sea change in how nation states are able to shape and exercise 
sovereignty over the technology on which their citizens, economies and systems 
of government depend.
14 Finley, K. (2014), ‘What Oracle’s Botched Obamacare Site Says About the Future of the Web’, Wired, 7 March 2014, 
https://www.wired.com/2014/03/oracle-oregon.
15 Varma, P., Matthan, R., Chaudhuri, R. and Madhukar, C. V. (2024), The Future of Digital Public Infrastructure: 
A Thesis for Rapid Global Adoption, Carnegie India, https://carnegie-production-assets.s3.amazonaws.com/static/
files/The_Future_of_Digital_Public_Infrastructure-_A_Thesis_for_Rapid_Global_Adoption-1.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10 Chatham House
03 
Sovereignty
DPI promises greater sovereign control over digital 
infrastructure, reducing geopolitical dependencies 
and fostering self-determination.
Even countries with significant financial resources and the most developed 
digital sectors rely on complex international trade flows. These supply chains 
are characterized by monopolies, export controls and bottlenecks, particularly 
in cloud infrastructure and semiconductors. To a lesser extent, these restrictions 
also impact the availability of telecommunications equipment and critical minerals. 
Consequently, in provisioning technology stacks, most nations are dependent 
on foreign software providers, equipment and talent.
While self-sufficiency in this regard is likely impossible even for so-called ‘technology 
superpowers’, greater sovereignty – as measured by a country’s capacity to build 
and shape the technology it depends on – is eminently achievable. In recent years, 
in a push to strengthen sovereignty, numerous countries have reassessed both 
the costs and the long-term stability of their foreign technology dependencies. 
Singapore, Vietnam, Nigeria and Kenya have legislated that the data of their citizens 
must be stored in-country. 16 In addition, dozens of countries have passed laws 
to regulate multinational digital service providers in an attempt to correct previous 
failures related to stewardship of their societies, markets or citizens’ lives online. 17 
European technology sovereignty was a core theme at the AI Action Summit in 2025, 
with President Macron later warning that, ‘We cannot depend on a few American 
companies to manage our data infrastructure, it’s a matter of European public 
interest… there is no such thing as happy vassalage.’ 18
Government innovation for public good has been at the forefront of DPI 
developments to date. A typical DPI approach will see governments pursuing 
digital projects that resolve an identifiable societal need.
16 Afina, Y. et al. (2024), Towards a global approach to digital platform regulation: Preserving openness amid the 
push for internet sovereignty, Research Paper, London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, https://doi.org/ 
10.55317/9781784135935.
17 Ibid.
18 Hoez, J. (2025), ‘Macron’s ‘Choose Europe for Science’ speech’, The French Dispatch, 5 May 2025, translation, 
https://www.frenchdispatch.eu/p/macrons-choose-europe-for-science-speech-sorbonne.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
11 Chatham House
In 2016, the National Payments Corporation of India, an Indian state-owned 
organization, developed Unified Payments Interface (UPI), a digital system 
that enables instant mobile payments. This DPI, presented as a way to make the 
financial system more accessible to citizens, was also driven by political imperatives 
to establish sovereign foundations for the country’s domestic digital economy. 
IndiaPay, one of the payment apps enabled by UPI, now serves over half a billion 
users, reducing transaction dependencies by processing payments in-country and 
tackling the dominance of monopoly players in the Indian digital payment sector. 19
Sovereign ambitions also informed Estonia’s X-Road project that enables and shapes 
the secure flow of data in the country: leaving the data of citizens more accessible 
to the state and government-approved businesses, and less accessible to those 
beyond its national borders. Given the threat posed by neighbouring Russia, Estonia 
is the first country to set up a ‘Data Embassy’, as part of a contingency plan to ensure 
digital continuity for its citizens. Located in Luxembourg and under heavy security, 
this data centre comes under Estonian jurisdiction (as would be the case for 
a physical embassy), through a new international law concept inspired by the Vienna 
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.20 The X-Road platform is both secure and built 
on open-source technology, which enables private companies and governments 
in over 100 countries – such as Japan (in the energy sector), Germany (for medical 
prescriptions) and Brazil (in public service delivery across states) – to use the system 
to simplify and modernize services as well as reinforce sovereignty. 21
In another example of government-led innovation, Martha Lane Fox, the then-UK 
digital champion, spearheaded a project to create a digital platform to facilitate 
public services in the UK, which resulted in the gov.uk website in 2012. Under the 
UK’s innovative Open Government Licence (OGL), the website has formed the basis 
for government-run digital services in dozens of other countries, including Canada. 
According to Ross Ferguson, the former director of platforms in the Canadian Digital 
Service, the success of the website stands out as ‘an example of what is possible when 
governments invest in digital public goods and infrastructure’.22 Shortly after coming 
to power, the current UK Labour government announced its plans to bring together 
three digital initiatives – the Government Digital Service (GDS), Central Digital 
19 UPI has itself faced scrutiny for its dominance by US-backed systems. Walmart-backed PhonePe and Google 
Pay together handle around 85 per cent of transactions on UPI.
20 Estonia government (undated), ‘Factsheet: Data Embassy’, https://e-estonia.com/wp-content/uploads/
factsheet_data_embassy.pdf; Sierzputowski, B. (2019), ‘The Data Embassy Under Public International Law’, 
International & Comparative Law Quarterly, 68(1), pp. 225–242, doi:10.1017/S0020589318000428.
21 X-Road (undated), ‘X-Road Case Studies’, https://x-road.global/case-studies.
22 Ferguson, R. (2023), ‘The international reach of UK’s Notify service’, Public.digital, https://public.digital/
pd-insights/blog/2023/03/the-international-reach-of-uks-notify-service.
Given the threat posed by neighbouring Russia, 
Estonia is the first country to set up a ‘Data 
Embassy’, as part of a contingency plan to ensure 
digital continuity for its citizens.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
12 Chatham House
and Data Office (CDDO) and Incubator for AI (i.AI) – under the Department for 
Science, Innovation and Technology, in order to unite efforts to improve digital 
public services and boost innovation.23
The UK government’s consolidation of digital initiatives under one department 
is indicative of the value now placed on the development of technology solutions and 
the promise of emerging technology. Governments around the world have identified 
AI as a critical part of the global digital economy, domestic economic competitiveness 
and national security, as well as a force shaping politics, culture and education. 
There is debate over whether governments have the capacity to build or scale 
AI technologies when compared to private sector providers. But there is a growing 
realization that government-owned datasets, and data gathered from AI users, 
give government-backed AI technologies a unique advantage, because the data 
is high quality, legitimate (legally obtained) and tied to real everyday uses.
The UK’s AI Opportunities Action Plan identifies ‘Sovereign AI compute 
[computational power], owned and/or allocated by the public sector’ as the 
infrastructure that ‘will enable the UK to quickly and independently allocate compute 
to national priorities.’24 More broadly, the Public AI Network25 – an organization that 
promotes the use of AI for the public good – has highlighted the significant moves 
made by Europe, Canada, Japan, India and Singapore in pursuit of public, sovereign 
AI. Furthermore, through its own recent AI action plan, the US has prioritized its 
role in setting digital technical standards for open AI models where the country 
currently lags behind China, whose DeepSeek, Kimi, MiniMax and Qwen AI models 
all rank highly in global AI indexes. 26
Strengthening state sovereignty over digital technologies is not without its risks. 
Digital technologies are vulnerable to authoritarian abuse and overreach. For 
example, digital payments are more easily surveilled; single digital identities raise 
questions about how citizens are profiled or subjected to social scoring, such as in 
China’s Social Credit System;27 and the collection of biometric data has obvious 
applications in controversial policing practices, like automated facial recognition. 
To date, DPI innovations have centred on technology in service of a modern, 
digital society, and while they have largely been built with public benefit in mind, 
they remain open to misuse. As such, democratic oversight, legal safeguards and 
meaningful public accountability are just as essential in governing DPI as they 
are in any other domain of public infrastructure, as was the case even before 
the digital age.
23 Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, Cabinet Office and The Rt Hon Peter Kyle MP (2024), 
‘DSIT bolstered to better serve the British public through science and technology’, press release, 8 July 2024, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/dsit-bolstered-to-better-serve-the-british-public-through-science- 
and-technology.
24 UK Government (2025), ‘AI Opportunities Action Plan’, Department for Science, Innovation and Technology, 
January 2025, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ai-opportunities-action-plan/ai-opportunities- 
action-plan.
25 Public AI Network (undated), ‘Public AI: Infrastructure for the Common Good’, www.publicai.network.
26 The White House (2025), ‘Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan’, July 2025, https://www.whitehouse.gov/ 
wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Americas-AI-Action-Plan.pdf.
27 Government of Canada (2025), ‘Big data and the social credit system: The security consequences’, Canadian 
Security Intelligence Service, July 2025, https://www.canada.ca/en/security-intelligence-service/corporate/
publications/china-and-the-age-of-strategic-rivalry/big-data-and-the-social-credit-system-the-security- 
consequences.html.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
13 Chatham House
There are limits to technology sovereignty that a DPI approach cannot resolve. 
Where dependencies run wide and deep, with entrenched incumbents and high 
capital investment requirements – as is the case for cloud computing, for instance – 
governments must temper their sovereign ambitions. While Europe’s GAIA-X cloud 
infrastructure is in principle an important project, it is not close to being considered 
a viable alternative to US providers like Amazon Web Services (AWS) or Microsoft’s 
Azure.28 Moreover, the UK’s long-running battle with technology firms over the 
rollout of end-to-end encryption – such as the Apple and WhatsApp legal cases 29 – 
highlights both the limitations of regulation as a path to sovereignty and the limits 
that advances in technology can impose on sovereignty. Some fear that this pattern 
may be repeated in the future with advanced AI. Finally, ensuring digital systems 
are resilient to abuse and exclusion, regardless of how they have been built and 
deployed, remains a first-order governance challenge.
Nevertheless, faced with an unpredictable and insecure geopolitical environment, 
middle powers and developing countries have prioritized increased national and 
regional sovereignty over the technology stacks they implement. DPI approaches 
offer a tested route to meeting these ambitions. DPI is also a soft power mechanism 
that exporting countries can exercise for greater influence on the global stage. For 
example, had China, rather than the US, been the driving force behind the internet, 
the core principles of freedom of expression, open access and user privacy that today 
shape many digital societies of the world might have looked rather different.
Table 1. Use cases – sovereignty
Country Issue Existing solution* Requirements
France Citizens wish to avoid 
US or Chinese AI models.
CurrentAI – a global public interest 
AI partnership, aimed at reshaping the 
existing AI landscape by developing and 
supporting large-scale initiatives that serve 
the public interest.
Large-scale investment and government 
backing, strong public–private cooperation, 
and a clear mission.
Bangladesh Ministers want all 
data on citizens to be 
held locally, ideally on 
state-owned servers.
myGov – a secure, cloud-based platform 
for storing and sharing verified citizen 
documentation and certification.
Independent building blocks such as digital 
ID, digital payments, trust infrastructure, 
or data sharing and credentials, with clear 
technical standards, operational guidelines 
and a governance structure.
* for more information see Annex 1.
28 Scott, M. (2024), ‘XI. Why Europe’s Cloud Ambitions Have Failed’, in Kaltheuner, F., Saari, L., Kak, A. and Myers 
West, S. (eds) (2024), Redirecting Europe’s AI Industrial Policy: From Competitiveness to Public Interest, AI Now Institute, 
October 2024, https://ainowinstitute.org/publications/xi-why-europes-cloud-ambitions-have-failed.
29 Kleinman, Z. (2025), ‘WhatsApp tells BBC it backs Apple in legal row with UK over user data’, BBC News, 
11 June 2025, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cgmjrn42wdwo.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
14 Chatham House
04 
Economic 
opportunity
DPI can provide an affordable path to digitalization, support 
domestic industries, widen access to financial tools and 
strengthen public finance management, such as tax collection 
and anti-fraud efforts.
Digitalization is a necessary condition for both modern domestic growth and 
participation in the global economy. However, traditional approaches to this process 
carry too high a cost for most countries to pursue at scale. Estimates by Professor 
David Eaves of University College London put the average annual spend on such 
projects by the governments of advanced economies at around $250 per capita, 
compared with just $14 dollars per capita in the rest of the world. To rebalance 
this disparity would require nearly $1.4 trillion in new annual IT spend. 30 Such 
an investment was unrealistic even before recent tightening of government budgets. 
In this context, the search for new, affordable ways of building these systems 
should be a priority.
The DPI principles of interoperability, openness and the prioritization of public 
good enable countries to adopt a new, more affordable approach to building key 
digital systems – through the use and re-use of shared, open systems. As mentioned 
earlier, traditional ways of developing digital systems tend to result in expensive and 
inefficient silos where departments procure and maintain separate IT systems that 
are often locked into a single vendor for assistance. These systems are typically not 
interoperable with other private and public services, unable to share data with other 
departments, closed, or cannot be built upon for future services. To use an example 
from the UK, citizens are enrolled in dozens of siloed ID systems: national insurance 
numbers, passport numbers, NHS numbers, driving licence numbers, unique 
30 Eaves (2024), ‘Lessons from digital public infrastructure’; Eaves, D. and Rao, K. (2024), ‘What do we know 
about the state of DPI in the world? Preliminary insights from the DPI Map’, UCL Institute for Innovation and 
Public Purpose, https://medium.com/iipp-blog/what-do-we-know-about-the-state-of-dpi-in-the-world- 
preliminary-insights-from-the-dpi-map-51d5e49f299b.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
15 Chatham House
taxpayer references, unique pupil numbers, Proof of Age Standards Scheme (PASS) 
cards and so on. This expands to hundreds of IDs across the private companies 
and services that citizens use, from banking to online retailers, each demanding 
citizens prove and re-prove who they are. This duplication increases the vulnerability 
of users, whose data is replicated and retained in dozens of places at once, and 
also creates enormous inefficiencies – in contrast, Estonia claims its DPI approach 
to public services, enabled by a digital ID, saves more than 1,400 years of working 
time and 2 per cent of its GDP annually. 31
As well as the potential budget savings, there are clear opportunities to boost 
economic growth. The fact that digital infrastructure underpins both the public 
and private sectors means government IT budgets could be spent in the service 
of the economy as a whole, rather than on narrow, single-use solutions.
University College London’s Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose has put 
forward 11 ways in which the positive economic impact of a new digitalization 
strategy like DPI might be measured. 32 These include reduced costs and increases 
in service quality and availability, but also capture a range of second-order 
market-shaping benefits: the creation of space for new businesses, increased 
competition through improved accessibility and expanded opportunities for 
consumers. Research from India and Brazil highlights a significant uptick in economic 
outcomes – more commercial activity, sales and higher tax revenue – as cashless 
transfers become available and transactions become faster and cheaper.33 During 
the pandemic, countries with DPI in place before the COVID-19 outbreak were able 
to inject cash into their slowing economies by reaching three times more beneficiaries 
with emergency cash transfers than those countries without. This demonstrates the 
ability of DPI to provide a vital boost for the economy in times of economic strain.34
DPI can give all businesses the digital tools to compete with better resourced overseas 
players. Mobile wallets allow customers to pay for goods and services efficiently, 
streamline payment processes and reduce transaction costs for business owners 
31 Khan, I. and Shahaab, A. (2020), ‘Estonia is a ‘digital republic’ and this may well be our future too’, Independent, 
14 October 2020, https://www.independent.co.uk/tech/estonia-digital-republic-online-voting-blockchain- 
b912567.html.
32 Eaves, D., Coyle, D., Vasconcellos, B. and Deshmukh, S. (2025), The Economics of Shared Digital Infrastructures: 
A framework for assessing societal value, IIPP Policy Report 2025/02, London: UCL Institute for Innovation and Public 
Purpose, https://www.bennettschool.cam.ac.uk/publications/the-economics-of-shared-digital-infrastructures- 
a-framework-for-assessing-societal-value.
33 Dubey, T. S. and Purnanandam, A. (2023), Can Cashless Payments Spur Economic Growth?, SSRN, 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=4373602; ACI Worldwide(2022), ‘Latin American Economies Poised to Reap Economic 
Benefits of Real-Time Payments as Adoption Gathers Pace – ACI Worldwide Report’ 26 April 2022, press release, 
https://investor.aciworldwide.com/news-releases/news-release-details/latin-american-economies-poised-reap- 
economic-benefits-real-time.
34 Clark, J., Marin, G., Ardic Alper, O. P. and Galicia Rabadan, G. A. (2025), Digital Public Infrastructure and 
Development: A World Bank Group Approach, Digital Transformation White Paper, Washington, DC: World Bank, 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/entities/publication/cca2963e-27bf-4dbb-aa5a-24a0ffc92ed9.
Research from India and Brazil highlights a significant 
uptick in economic outcomes as cashless transfers 
become available and transactions become faster 
and cheaper.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
16 Chatham House
by removing third parties. Pix, an instant payment platform created and managed 
by the Central Bank of Brazil, reduced transaction costs for its users – with 
an average cost to merchants of 0.22 per cent, compared with fees of 2.2 per cent 
for credit cards in Brazil. 35 The reduced costs for its 153 million users both support 
Brazilian small and medium-sized enterprises and contribute to a more balanced, 
inclusive and dynamic marketplace.36
Alongside direct benefits, payment systems made possible through DPI shape the 
economy by increasing market entry points and enabling new groups to participate 
more fully in financial systems. With the introduction of Aadhar in India, the 
cost of verifying a customer’s identity plummeted from $10–$12 to about $0.20, 
making it feasible to serve millions in low-income and remote settings and 
enabling economically disempowered people to save, invest, access credit and 
better control their finances.37 According to the World Bank, the number of Indian 
adults with a bank account more than doubled between 2011 and 2021, which 
studies attribute to cheaper and more widely-available digital ID checks and digital 
payment systems.38 Between 2006 and 2013, Kenya’s dominant mobile payment 
system, M-PESA, contributed to the country’s 3.4 per cent per capita real income 
growth.39 As sign-ups to the platform increased, so too did economic gains.
There is evidence that DPI approaches present further opportunities for improved 
public finance management. In Kenya, 59 per cent of the country’s GDP flows 
through M-PESA. This has drawn firms operating in the informal sector into the 
tax net and provided new opportunities for collecting tax. In 2024, the Kenyan 
government imposed a controversial 3 per cent duty on M-PESA transactions, 
which critics say counters the benefits of financial inclusion. 40 DPI that brings 
together identity systems and direct payments can reduce instances of fraud: India’s 
government reported its Direct Benefit Transfer system enabled quick distribution 
of COVID-19 relief funds, ‘ensuring accurate targeting of the beneficiaries, 
de-duplication and reduction of fraud’.41 By contrast, many advanced economies 
reported rampant fraud in the distribution of COVID-19 relief funds. An Associated 
Press analysis estimates $280 billion of US COVID-19 relief funding was 
lost to fraud. 42
35 Duarte, A. et al. (2022), Central banks, the monetary system and public payment infrastructures: lessons from 
Brazil’s Pix, Bank of International Settlements (BIS), No 52, https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull52.pdf.
36 Jain, S. (2025), ‘What happens to an economy with digital public infrastructure?’, Gates Foundation, 
16 April 2025, https://www.gatesfoundation.org/ideas/articles/inclusive-economies-digital-public-
infrastructure#:~:text=2.,banks%2C%20cooperatives%2C%20and%20fintechs.
37 Ibid.
38 Klapper, L., Singer, D. and Ansar, S. (2021), ‘The Global Findex Database 2021, India Country Brief’, World Bank, 
https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/0e271c416d4afa3237cf3a6226884d3b-0430062023/original/Findex20
21-IndiaCountryBrief-DRAFT-2-03-23.pdf.
39 World Economic Forum (2015), ‘How mobile money is driving economic growth’, 15 September 2015, 
https://www.weforum.org/stories/2015/09/how-mobile-money-is-driving-economic-growth.
40 ITEdgeNews (2024), ‘M-Pesa 2.0: The case for reimagining Kenya’s payment infrastructure’, 24 February 2025, 
https://www.itedgenews.africa/m-pesa-2-0-the-case-for-reimagining-kenyas-payment-infrastructure.
41 Government of India, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (2024), ‘JAM (Jan Dhan, Aadhar, Mobile) 
TRINITY and digital revolution: A Decade of Financial Inclusion, Transparency and Corruption Free India’, 
press release, 20 December 2024, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2086611.
42 Lardner, R., McDermott, J. and Kessler, A. (2023), ‘The Great Grift: How billions in COVID-19 relief aid was 
stolen or wasted’, AP News, 12 June 2023, https://apnews.com/article/pandemic-fraud-waste-billions-small- 
business-labor-fb1d9a9eb24857efbe4611344311ae78.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
17 Chatham House
Replicating outdated methods of digitalization is not feasible for most nations. 
Using DPI principles can provide a credible and cost-effective digitalization strategy. 
With relatively low implementation costs compared to standard digitalization 
approaches, DPI strategies can utilize a range of different financial resources, such 
as philanthropic funding or political union support. MOSIP (Modular Open Source 
Identity Platform), a digital ID system with over 100 million users worldwide, 
was launched through $28 million of philanthropic support from the World Bank, 
Gates Foundation and the Omidyar Network, among others. Today, MOSIP has 
an estimated annual operating budget of between $5 million and $7 million, yet 
the project has engaged over 25 countries across Asia Pacific, Africa, Latin America 
and the Caribbean.43 Similarly, a 2018 extension of Estonia’s X-Road to enable data 
sharing across European borders, with an estimated cost of €252,000, had full 
EU support through the European Regional Development Fund, which offered 
to cover up to €352,000 through the Operational Programme for Cohesion Policy 
Funding for the 2014–2020 period.44 These projects demonstrate high engagment, 
cost-effectiveness and investment diversification.
By circumventing the mistakes of siloed digital services, a DPI approach lays a strong 
foundational layer for a country’s economy, reducing costs, contributing to growth 
and unlocking new avenues for financial inclusion, participation, innovation and 
efficiency across sectors.
Table 2. Use cases – economic opportunity
Country Issue Existing solution* Requirements
Togo During the COVID-19 pandemic, 
citizens struggled to feed 
their families.
NOVISSI – an emergency cash transfer 
programme that supported informal 
workers whose incomes were disrupted. 
The programme was later extended to rural 
areas with higher poverty incidence.
Mobile phone access, satellite imagery, 
well-maintained demographic data and 
strong government leadership.
India Small-business owners are 
frustrated that card-based 
payment systems have increased 
the costs of using their services.
Unified Payment Interface (UPI) – 
an instant real-time payment system that 
enables instant money transfers between 
bank accounts using a mobile device.
A supportive banking system, access 
to mobile phones and regulator 
alignment across authorities.
Kenya There is often no physical bank 
branch in smaller towns and 
rural communities, so access 
to bank accounts is limited 
for many people.
M-PESA – a system that enables users 
to send, receive and store money using 
mobile phones. The system opens economic 
entry points for people otherwise cut off 
from financial systems.
Strategic private partnerships, secure 
telecom infrastructure, regulatory 
flexibility and user-centred design.
* for more information see Annex 1.
43 Hariharan, V. (2024), Lessons Learned: Reflecting on MOSIP’s Journey to Scale, Digital Impact Alliance, 
https://dial.global/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/MOSIP-Lessons-Learned.pdf.
44 European Commission (2018), ‘X-Road – cross-border co-development of national data exchange platform’, 
https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/projects/europe/x-road-cross-border-co-development-of-national- 
data-exchange-platform.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18 Chatham House
05 
Resilience 
and security
Through its adaptability and openness, DPI boosts resilience 
by reducing single points of failure and dependencies that can 
be weaponized by adversaries.
In the national security context, DPI can bolster resilience and safeguards through 
enabling adaptability and mitigating systemic risks.
Calls to remove Russian banks from the SWIFT payment system (a significant global 
financial player) following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine were initially met with alarm 
by some states in the EU, as the situation brought into focus their own vulnerabilities. 
From their perspective this sanction measure was a gamble: with Germany, France 
and Italy concerned that companies owed money by Russian businesses would 
struggle to be paid, and consequently their economies would suffer. It also brought 
to light the fact that if SWIFT could be used against a G20 economy, it could 
theoretically be used against any country that falls foul of powerful states that 
control access to the payment system.
The dependence on digital systems located in other countries that are predominantly 
controlled and influenced by both powerful state actors and multinational providers 
is a growing concern. A DPI approach requires an evaluation of whether existing 
dependencies are secure and adaptable to changing geopolitical conditions, 
an assessment of the costs for mitigating any identified risks and a blueprint 
for addressing those vulnerabilities.
Using DPI that can be controlled domestically, countries can create sovereign 
alternatives in case of global digital disruption or political instability. Robust 
domestic digital payment infrastructure, for instance, can support a state’s internal 
economy in the short term, even if access to international systems is disrupted. 45 
45 Khiaonarong, T., Leinonen, H. and Rizaldy, R. (2021), ‘Operational Resilience in Digital Payments: 
Experiences and Issues’, International Monetary Fund, 2021(288), https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/
journals/001/2021/288/article-A001-en.xml?ArticleTabs=fulltext.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
19 Chatham House
DPI typically positions the governance, data and operational control of critical digital 
systems within national borders or under publicly accountable entities. This contrasts 
sharply with pursuing seemingly cheaper or more convenient siloed technology 
solutions by relying on foreign-based corporations or international bodies influenced 
by a few powerful states. Sovereign control can enhance a country’s ability to ensure 
the system serves national interests, is flexible to change and cannot be easily shut 
down or manipulated externally.
Innovation in domestic digital infrastructure capacity has been felt most keenly 
in conflict and crisis. The Russian invasion of Ukraine significantly accelerated 
Kyiv’s pursuit of resilient DPI solutions to public service provision, originally 
a 2019 campaign pledge by President Volodymyr Zelenskyy. Ukraine’s sovereign 
Diia platform – launched just before, and perhaps in anticipation of, the invasion – 
was designed to federate data storage and be resilient to cyberattacks, and it 
was adapted quickly to provide new services in war, including the distribution of war 
bonds and secure channels to report Russian troop movement. 46 It successfully 
maintained access to citizen services after February 2022 by migrating to distributed 
cloud servers with the support of US providers. 47 However, Ukraine’s dependence 
on foreign – predominantly US-based – cloud and cybersecurity service providers 
still raises complex questions about national resilience and DPI.
Elsewhere, digital ID and direct digital payment systems are credited with recently 
enabling the Bangladeshi government to pre-emptively distribute anticipatory 
mobile transfers of $37 to each person likely to be affected by forecasted floods, 
improving readiness and reducing the impact of floodwaters. 48
DPI approaches emphasize open standards, interoperable solutions and modular 
components. These principles contribute to a country’s digital resilience by reducing 
single points of failure: should a system fail, the impact is contained, and alternative 
or complementary systems can continue to function, ensuring adaptability and 
continuity of essential services and faster recovery. Moving away from siloed 
solutions broadens familiarity with common digital systems, thereby enhancing 
internal expertise, organizational capacity and resilience.
The participation of multiple vendors and operators in the development and 
supply of a digital system further reduces the risks associated with being reliant 
on one vendor. As previously mentioned, the 2024 Crowdstrike glitch that crippled 
hospital systems and grounded air traffic following a faulty software update 
underscored the vulnerability of critical systems to single points of failure. 49 
Despite prompting calls for urgent reviews of critical digital systems, single-vendor 
provision of operating systems, cloud computing and network infrastructure 
remains the default. Commenting on a review by the US Cyber Safety Review 
Board into a major government security breach, Senator Ron Wyden stated that 
46 Lawler, D. (2023), ‘Ukrainians use the same app to file taxes and track Russian troops’, AXIOS, 26 May 2023, 
https://www.axios.com/2023/05/26/ukraine-diia-app-fedorov-russian-troops.
47 New America (2023), ‘Digital Public Infrastructure in Ukraine: Harnessing Technology for the Public Good’, 
https://www.newamerica.org/the-thread/digital-public-infrastructure-ukraine-war.
48 United Nations Development Programme (2024), ‘From Response to Resilience: How Digital Financial Services 
Can Advance Climate Adaptation Efforts Better Than Cash Alliance contribution’, https://sdgfinance.undp.org/
news-events/response-resilience-how-digital-financial-services-can-advance-climate-adaptation.
49 Privacy International (2024), ‘CrowdStrike: What the 2024 outage reveals about security’, 
https://privacyinternational.org/long-read/5507/crowdstrike-what-2024-outage-reveals-about-security.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
20 Chatham House
although ‘the government’s dependence on Microsoft poses a serious national 
security threat’, given the federal government’s overwhelming dependence on the 
technology provider it would be very difficult to replace the company. 50 Similarly, 
there are growing European fears about the continent’s dependence on Microsoft 
products, with an internal European Commission review judging that ‘there are 
no known credible offerings from European providers’ that could replace the 
US software giant. 51
While a DPI approach boosts security it also has second-order benefits for national 
resilience and productivity. By committing to developing and maintaining resilient 
digital infrastructure, a nation must foster a robust pool of its own digital talent. 
This growth in domestic expertise reduces reliance on foreign specialists for critical 
maintenance, ongoing development and rapid responses to cybersecurity threats. 
In addition, it ensures that the knowledge and skills necessary to secure and 
steward a nation’s digital foundations can be found at home. The UK’s AI strategy 
explicitly names public and private UK talent as a central pillar. 52 For organizations 
such as NATO, improvements in domestic digital capacity are central for extending 
and bolstering intergovernmental resilience.
By taking responsibility for the provision of robust digital systems, Ukraine and 
other countries have shown a credible path forward for digital infrastructure that 
strengthens national resilience and security.
Table 3. Use cases – resilience and security
Country Issue Existing solution* Requirements
Malawi It is hard for the government 
to reliably verify citizen identity. 
This is having an impact on 
border control, and by extension, 
counterterrorism and 
immigration policy.
National Registration System – a permanent 
and continuous national registration and 
identification system, including a physical 
ID card that is accessible and verifiable 
on smartphones. 
Reform of the National Registration 
Act, investment and development 
in hybrid ID systems (including 
from UNDP) and capacity-building.
Ukraine The government is having 
to refocus its resources following 
the full-scale invasion, resulting 
in reduced access to government 
documents and public services.
Diia – a platform to federate data storage, 
improve cybersecurity and provide services and 
citizen support during the conflict. The system 
allows users to report the position of Russian 
soldiers, take part in opinion polls, process tax 
payments and filing, access e-services, make 
army donations, and access e-restoration – 
where citizens can obtain compensation for 
destroyed or damaged housing as a result 
of Russian aggression. 
Interoperable systems across 
departments, complete and 
secure citizen databases, robust 
cybersecurity standards and highly 
skilled internal technical expertise. 
* for more information see Annex 1.
50 The Register (2024), ‘US government excoriates Microsoft for ‘avoidable errors’ but keeps paying for its products’, 
5 April 2024, https://www.theregister.com/2024/04/05/microsoft_government_contracts.
51 Wulff Wold, J. (2025), ‘Internal documents reveal Commission fears over Microsoft dependency’, Euractiv, 
9 January 2025, https://www.euractiv.com/section/tech/news/internal-documents-reveal-commission-fears- 
over-microsoft-dependency. In April 2025, Microsoft announced a set of ‘European digital commitments’, noting 
that ‘in a time of geopolitical volatility, we are committed to providing digital stability’. Commitments included 
expanding cloud and AI infrastructure, upholding Europe’s digital resilience and continuing to protect and defend 
Europe’s cybersecurity. Smith, B. (2025), ‘Microsoft announces new European digital commitments’, Microsoft 
press release, https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2025/04/30/european-digital-commitments.
52 UK Government (2025), ‘AI Opportunities Action Plan’.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
21 Chatham House
06 
Public sector 
modernization
DPI can transform bureaucratic efficiency and service delivery 
through automation and interoperability.
The rapid pace of digital innovation, from generative AI to autonomous vehicles, 
is often attributed to the private sector. However, this narrow view misses 
a crucial element: governments are also significant innovators in their own right. 
Understanding and supporting public sector innovation is essential for ensuring 
that technological progress serves the public good and addresses societal needs.
Public sector modernization through DPI involves integrating otherwise siloed 
solutions into unified, foundational digital infrastructure. As an illustration, while 
UK citizens can access a range of public services online as varied as financial support, 
voter registration, birth certification, student loans or even pet registration, each 
requires engagement with an individual digital system. By contrast, a UK Google user 
has access to a myriad of Google-owned and third-party applications through a single 
login and interface. The ambition of DPI is to make the former more like the latter.
But simply rolling out a digitalization agenda will not, on its own, transform 
service delivery. First, equitable access to technology is essential for enabling 
efficient, inclusive and transparent public service delivery. Without addressing 
the digital divide, DPI or any digitalization strategy will not maximize the benefits 
of technology. Second, in addition to sustained funding and direction, meaningful 
change requires public transparency, citizen support and oversight to protect 
users against the misuse of their data and enable the deep reform of underlying 
bureaucratic systems. In successful cases, DPI is accompanied by a fundamental 
rethinking of how public services are conceived, built and delivered – starting with 
the perspective of users, rather than that of government agencies or technology 
providers. This requires states to adopt a human-centred method for improving 
public services through digitalization. This means mapping all in-person and

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
22 Chatham House
digital touchpoints in delivery and designing cohesive end-to-end experiences, 
pursuing modernization not as a goal in itself, but as a means to achieve more 
accessible, efficient and equitable outcomes for all citizens.
At a minimum, DPI systems provide convenience for the public and cost-efficiency 
for the government. But, for the more ambitious, DPI presents an opportunity 
to facilitate a stronger and more secure social contract, where in return for 
basic data and identity details, consenting citizens receive timely, beneficial 
and practical information from the government, greater satisfaction in service 
delivery and reaffirmed – or re-established – trust in government. Like Ukraine’s 
Diia, Estonia’s X-Road is described by the Estonian government as ‘the backbone’ 
of its digital state, providing access to over 3,000 public and private services and 
facilitating the sharing of data between those services and agencies efficiently and 
securely.53 The open-source code of the X-Road system has been shared with other 
countries. In Singapore, the national digital ID, Singpass, also promises ‘secure 
and convenient access to over 2,700 services across 800 government agencies 
and businesses’.54
Table 4. Use cases – public sector modernization
Country Issue Existing solution* Requirements
UK Recipients of disability benefit must 
travel to a government building to receive 
payment. This can be extremely difficult 
in terms of accessibility and is an inefficient 
use of their time. 
gov.uk – the UK government’s official 
website, providing a central hub for 
government services and information. 
Political and financial support for 
digital solutions and a higher risk 
tolerance for mistakes along the way. 
Estonia There are prevalent inefficiencies and 
duplicated efforts across government 
agencies. Public services would be far 
better if departments could access 
databases across government. 
X-Road – open-source software that 
provides unified and secure data 
exchange between organizations 
in a collaborative ecosystem.
Political support of open-source 
software and ecosystem solutions 
and a secure and scalable data 
exchange platform. 
Brazil Filing and processing divergent forms 
to meet basic public service provisions 
is not only unsatisfying but makes the 
country feel stuck in the past.
Identificação Civil Nacional – 
provides each citizen with a national 
unique identity number that will carry 
other official information from other 
governmental identity documents.
Full system government digitalization 
strategy, centralization of databases, 
data transfers between public 
administration bodies, and a review 
of data protection legislation.
* for more information see Annex 1.
The introduction of digital governance systems, or e-governance, is often the first 
step in developing DPI. In 2024, Estonia’s capital city Tallinn, Paris and Riyadh 
were rated in the top three spots of the UN’s Local Online Services Index, due 
to their provision of highly proficient digital institutional frameworks that both 
facilitate the delivery of information and public services and boost participation 
53 e-estonia (2025), ‘X-road – Interoperability services’, https://e-estonia.com/solutions/interoperability-
services/x-road.
54 GovTech Singapore (2025), ‘Singpass’, https://www.tech.gov.sg/products-and-services/for-citizens/ 
digital-services/singpass.

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
23 Chatham House
and engagement, e-government literacy and technology.55 In Denmark, the 
country’s Digital Post – a cross-government digital postal service infrastructure – 
enables public authorities to communicate securely and digitally with citizens 
and businesses (and vice versa). By digitizing communication and increasing 
interoperability with external private senders, such as banks and utility services, 
the postal system further saves the Danish government €270 million annually.56 
Meanwhile, in South Korea, ‘smart cities’ were developed to provide technology 
solutions to transport, public security, disaster prevention, administration, 
healthcare and childcare. The government of Busan predicted that, in 2022, 
these initiatives would save the city’s residents up to 124 hours a year, including 
60 hours spent on daily commutes, 20 hours on administrative work and 5 hours 
waiting at hospitals. 57
While authorities often establish in-house departments for setting, leading and 
delivering digital modernization in government, in some areas, public–private 
partnerships help to plug the gaps in investment, R&D and innovation.
In finance modernization, ‘open banking’ has paved the way for a more transparent 
digital economy by providing secure data sharing between banks and third-party 
organizations, like fintech companies. For those with reduced access to physical 
bank branches, digital payment platforms such as Stripe, Plaid, Truelayer and UPI 
provide an improved and updated entry point to finance and public services. In the 
UK, this includes citizens’ ability to use open banking for HMRC tax payments 
and refunds, streamlining payments, reducing costs, cutting bureaucracy and 
improving fraud prevention.58 However, policymakers should be wary of commercial 
software or technology consultation masquerading as DPI, with vendors marketing 
their proprietary tools as the only solution to complex infrastructural problems. 
For example, the NHS Federated Data Platform – a system designed to create 
a common data infrastructure across the NHS – might enhance patient care, but the 
software provided is not a digital public good – it was not built with transparency, 
collaboration, or open principles in mind.
Public services need to benefit citizens, work for government coffers and strengthen 
trust in public institutions. Modern and transformative DPI needs to utilize digital 
technology effectively, but also be reuseable, interoperable and built on top of 
existing architecture. Partnerships, between government departments and with the 
private sector, can plug gaps in interoperability and help to prioritize accessibility, 
renewal and a unified user experience across government touchpoints.
55 UN DESA (2024), ‘Local E-Government Development’, in UN DESA (2024),  E-Government Survey 2024, 
https://desapublications.un.org/sites/default/files/publications/2024-09/%28Chapter%204%29%20
E-Government%20Survey%202024%201392024.pdf.
56 European Commission (2013), ‘Denmark: Digital mailboxes in all public institutions and companies’, Shaping 
Europe’s digital future, news article, 22 November 2013, https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/news/
denmark-digital-mailboxes-all-public-institutions-and-companies.
57 Teh, N. and Martina, A. (2019), Global Expert Mission South Korea Smart Cities 2019, UKRI and Global Alliance, 
https://iuk-business-connect.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/B2_15_KTN_SouthKorea_SmartCities.pdf.
58 HM Revenue & Customs (2024), ‘Open Banking privacy notice’, 22 May 2024, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/open-banking-privacy-notice/open-banking-privacy-notice#:~:text=Open%20
Banking%20allows%20you%20to,in%20to%20your%20HMRC%20account.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24 Chatham House
07 
Global DPI 
collaboration
DPI enables global collaboration on shared challenges without 
countries having to surrender autonomy. It can also act 
as a secondary channel for diplomacy.
As advocated by the UN’s Global Digital Compact, international collaboration 
on and through DPI involves interoperable systems that respect sovereignty while 
promoting shared resources and networks.59 These digital systems create and 
reinforce collaborative models, capacity-building and standard-setting. As a result, 
this digital infrastructure offers a new avenue for cooperation and diplomacy 
in an ever-fragmented global order.
Interoperable systems are often built using open-source software (OSS), where the 
source code is publicly available and can be used, modified and distributed freely 
by anyone and for any purpose. OSS licences grant users, including governments, 
these rights, with the aim of fostering greater collaboration and digitalization. 
These shared systems can lower costs, increase the flexibility of application and 
enhance security and reliability through community scrutiny.60
The COVID-19 pandemic underscored the importance of OSS with the mutual 
recognition of digital vaccination certificates. In partnership, the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and EU created the EU Digital COVID Certificate, adopted 
by all 27 EU member states. This system used open-source code and common 
principles to share healthcare information, which led to reduced transmission and 
saved lives. This approach enabled EU countries to leverage digital functions for 
health, while maintaining national guidelines on pandemic responses. 61
59 United Nations General Assembly Resolution (2025), Pact for the Future, Global Digital Compact and Declaration 
on Future Generations, https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/sotf-pact_for_the_future_adopted.pdf.
60 Open Source Initiative (2025), ‘Growing the impact of Open Source around the world’, https://opensource.org.
61 European Commission (2023), ‘EU Digital COVID Certificate’, https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-
policy/coronavirus-response/safe-covid-19-vaccines-europeans/eu-digital-covid-certificate_en.

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
25 Chatham House
Effective examples of open digital infrastructure during the COVID-19 pandemic 
accelerated global acceptance of interoperable systems, noticeably shifting 
the balance of interoperable digital infrastructure from intra-jurisdictional to 
cross-border. As a result, WHO, in collaboration with Saudi Arabia, has developed 
the Hajj health card scheme to support 3 million people travelling from Indonesia, 
Malaysia and Oman to Mecca for the annual pilgrimage.62 This open-source platform, 
built on robust and transparent standards, improves the safety of international 
pilgrims by providing a secure way for participating states to share personal data 
with healthcare providers, such as medication needs, allergies, immunization status 
and pre-existing conditions. This DPI tool increases data security and trust among 
participating countries.
International collaboration through DPI is not confined to healthcare. In Singapore, 
the Infocomm Media Development Authority created TradeTrust, a successful digital 
framework for trade that allows the exchange and verification of digitized documents. 
For electronic bills of lading for routes between Singapore and Rotterdam, TradeTrust 
has reduced the processing time from 5–10 days to under 24 hours.63 This has further 
cemented Singapore’s position as a secure, efficient trading partner, and a fintech 
leader in Southeast Asia. In the EU, the electronic Identification, Authentication 
and trust Services (eIDAS) framework, a comparable system for ensuring the 
authenticity of electronic signatures and documents, has achieved similar outcomes 
for improving international trust and trade.
There is insufficient funding for open-source DPI at present, which diminishes 
collaborative and digital diplomacy gains. The Digital Public Goods (DPG) Registry – 
a global multi-stakeholder initiative – is an exemplary record of digital tools that 
have open software, standards, data, AI systems and content that adhere to privacy 
standards and the attainment of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 64 
Likewise, the DPI Use Cases Explorer, offers a repository of applied DPI that deliver 
real-world services.65 But these registries are not exhaustive, and gaps remain. 
Without easily accessed interoperable systems, states will look for alternative sources 
for DPI. In these instances, developing and emerging countries are often co-opted 
into adopting either Global North or Chinese technological standards and systems. 
This problem is demonstrated by Pakistan’s reliance on Beijing’s China–Pakistan 
62 World Health Organization (2024), ‘WHO global network expands digital health certification for Hajj pilgrims’, 
https://www.who.int/news/item/21-10-2024-who-global-network-expands-digital-health-certification-for- 
hajj-pilgrims#:~:text=The%20Hajj%20health%20card%2C%20built,status%20and%20pre%2Dexisting 
%20conditions.
63 Yong, S. L. (2022), ‘Trade Digitalisation TradeTrust’, World Trade Organization, https://www.wto.org/english/
res_e/reser_e/pres_loh.pdf.
64 Digital Public Goods Registry (2025), ‘DPG Registry’, https://www.digitalpublicgoods.net/registry.
65 DPI Use Cases Explorer (2025), ‘DPI Use Cases Explorer’, https://dpiexplorer.org.
Effective examples of open digital infrastructure during 
the COVID-19 pandemic accelerated global acceptance 
of interoperable systems, noticeably shifting the 
balance of interoperable digital infrastructure from 
intra-jurisdictional to cross-border.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
26 Chatham House
Economic Corridor digital systems, exposing critical infrastructure to debt traps; 66 
African nations adopting Eurocentric General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
standards due to colonial legal ties; 67 and in the pursuit of AI capabilities, where 
middle powers and developing countries are presented with a binary choice between 
US and Chinese technology.68 Addressing this power imbalance is a critical issue.
Greater awareness of and funding for OSS would provide countries with more 
options, as would new interoperable systems, more cooperation, digital exchange 
and improved practice between states using similar DPI systems.
To date, a specific framework for DPI cooperation has not been established. But 
organic, effective collaboration on shared challenges is already happening through 
digital means. A formalized collaborative governance mechanism would be the next 
step to protect interoperable systems from potential disputes due to differing legal 
systems, while respecting autonomy and different standards. The final form of such 
a mechanism is yet to emerge, but lessons could be learned from Gavi, the Vaccine 
Alliance, on public–private partnership, co-financing and making the most of a lean 
governance structure for strategic direction and policymaking.
Table 5. Use cases – global DPI collaboration
Country Issue Existing solution* Requirements
European 
Union (EU)
Citizen digital health records are 
not valid when they travel to other 
EU member states. 
EU Digital COVID Certificate (built 
on the Global Digital Health Certification 
Network) – brought about greater alignment 
on standards and accreditation for digital 
vaccination certificates, and therefore 
improved health policies that facilitated 
international and domestic travel. 
Open standards and software, 
regional political support and 
well-maintained health datasets.
Singapore Issuing a bill of lading between 
a buyer in Italy and the shipping 
company in Singapore takes 
too long and disincentivizes 
engagement and trade 
partnerships.
TradeTrust – comprises globally accepted 
standards that connect governments and 
businesses to a public blockchain to enable 
trusted interoperability of electronic trade 
documents across digital platforms.
Strong public–private partnership 
and globally accepted standards 
for accreditation.
Saudi 
Arabia
Performing Hajj is a sacred 
pilgrimage, but many are worried 
that they will become unwell while 
travelling and do not complete 
this important religious duty.
The Hajj health card (built on the Global 
Digital Health Certification Network) – 
increased medical data sharing for better 
healthcare communication and delivery 
between nations engaged in Hajj.
Internationally shared goals and 
cultural traits, sharable health 
datasets and open standards 
and software.
* for more information see Annex 1.
66 Afzal, M. (2020), ‘“At all costs”: How Pakistan and China control the narrative on the China-Pakistan Economic 
Corridor’, The Brookings Institute, June 2020, https://www.brookings.edu/articles/at-all-costs-how-pakistan-and- 
china-control-the-narrative-on-the-china-pakistan-economic-corridor.
67 Bryant, J. (2021), ‘Africa in the Information Age: Challenges, Opportunities, and Strategies for Data Protection 
and Digital Rights’, Stanford Technology Law Review, 24(2), pp. 389–439.
68 Krasodomski, A. (2025), ‘The US–China AI race is forcing countries to reconsider who owns their digital 
infrastructure’, Chatham House Expert Comment, 12 May 2025, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2025/05/
us-china-ai-race-forcing-countries-reconsider-who-owns-their-digital-infrastructure.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
27 Chatham House
08 
Conclusion and 
recommendations
DPI can be transformative for societies, but it requires 
commitment to shared standards, steadfast implementation 
and strategic investment. This approach can be particularly 
challenging in a context of tight government budgets and 
shortsighted leadership.
This research paper has presented the case for adopting a DPI approach that 
enables governments to develop more sovereign, secure and modern social 
technology ecosystems. It has outlined the value that DPI can bring to sovereignty, 
resilience, security and public sector modernization, in addition to the economic 
opportunities and the role of DPI in promoting global collaboration. Throughout, 
the paper has highlighted important elements of the increased global uptake of DPI 
approaches, from Brazil to Ukraine. The analysis here is bullish on the need for new 
digitalization strategies, while recognizing that the more comprehensive migration 
of our lives online demands appropriate governance to prevent the abuse of new 
forms and concentrations of power.
DPI is more than a technical solution: it is a new theory of change that reframes 
the digital state as a platform for innovation and sovereignty. Countries are looking 
to renegotiate and reinvigorate the stewardship of their societies’ digital foundations 
as a strategic necessity in a world of geopolitical instability, technology sovereignty 
struggles and tight public budgets.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
28 Chatham House
There is a growing research and evidence base on how countries might embrace 
a DPI approach, from the G20 declarations and World Bank programmes to work 
by global philanthropic and research organizations. 69 States must begin with a set 
of guiding principles – interoperability, reusability, openness and the ability 
to securely share data – that shape both the design and the governance of digital 
infrastructure. The lessons from DPI show that to successfully revolutionize 
a country’s digital infrastructure, these principles must be at the centre of any 
DPI or sovereign technology strategy.
 — First, governments must continue to strengthen their capacity to shape 
technology beyond regulation and rule-making. From the US to China, 
and in middle powers like the UK and France, new investment – for 
example in attracting talent, digital literacy and civil service up-skilling – 
is strengthening state capacity to effectively procure, maintain and design 
digital public services.
 — Second, governments can boost interoperability across the public and private 
sectors by committing to openness. When government technology (such as 
gov.uk) is designed using a range of open standards and safeguards – such 
as open application programming interfaces (APIs), open documentation, open 
licensing and open-source codebases (the collection of source code used to build 
software) – it creates a robust and flexible foundational layer of technology 
that others can develop and build upon. This ensures interoperability, reduces 
vendor lock-in and supports future adaptation without costly reinvention.
 — Lastly, collaboration is strength. No state should expect to build digital 
technology in a vacuum. Partnerships (regional, multilateral, mini-lateral, 
public–private and technical) increase resilience, accelerate learning, reduce 
costs and create shared leverage in shaping global norms.
69 Government of India (2024), ‘Declaration on Digital Public Infrastructure, AI and Data for Governance – 
Joint Communiqué by the G20 Troika (India, Brazil and South Africa), endorsed by several G20 countries, guest 
countries and international organizations’, 20 November 2024, https://www.mea.gov.in/bilateral-documents.
htm?dtl/38551/Declaration+on+Digital+Public+Infrastructure+AI+and+Data+for+Governance++Joint+ 
Communiqu233+by+the+G20+Troika+India+Brazil+and+South+Africa+endorsed+by+several+G20+ 
countries+guest+countries+and+international+organizations; World Bank Group (2025), ‘Digital Public 
Infrastructure and Development: A World Bank Group Approach – Digital Transformation White Paper: Volume 1’, 
31 January 2025; Gates Foundation (2025), ‘Digital Public Infrastructure’, https://www.gatesfoundation.org/
our-work/programs/global-growth-and-opportunity/digital-public-infrastructure.
States must begin with a set of guiding principles – 
interoperability, reusability, openness and the ability 
to securely share data – that shape both the design 
and the governance of digital infrastructure.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
29 Chatham House
Recommendations
Moving from principles to practice requires coordinated action across multiple 
domains. There is no single blueprint, but there are common steps that can guide 
implementation.
1. Establish a political and institutional mandate for DPI
A DPI approach begins with a clear political commitment that recognizes digital 
infrastructure as a strategic asset and as a critical element of public sector reform. 
In many cases this has been done through intergovernmental bodies or forums, 
but a more concerted political effort is also needed to prioritize and make the case 
for digital infrastructure at the national and local levels.
Alongside political leadership, institutional mechanisms are essential to encourage 
citizens and allay any concerns over the adoption of this technology. This could take 
the form of mandated government departments like the Department for Science, 
Innovation and Technology in the UK; US-style public–private taskforces, where 
government agencies and private entities collaborate to deliver and finance public 
services; or a digital architecture board, with statutory powers that promote the 
adoption of common standards and reusable solutions to drive technology alignment 
across government. This is particularly important in political environments where 
the risk appetite for government innovation is low. This can include countries 
with heavily embedded bureaucratic legacy structures, governments interested 
in short-term gains, states with powerful interest groups, and those with a public that 
values tradition over innovation and where citizens show concern or distrust about 
the ability of governments to protect digital privacy.
2. Grow technical capacity
Modern states must develop public and private institutions capable of designing, 
stewarding, operating, procuring and regulating those technologies identified 
as critical to a nation’s digital sovereignty. Middle power and developing countries 
must conduct comprehensive and realistic assessments of their achievable domestic 
capabilities – as opposed to carrying out short-term box-ticking exercises – and 
pursue complementary partnerships that are both strategic and mutually reinforcing.
Capacity must grow within the public sector – if necessary, using investment 
from the open-source community and private actors. As stated earlier, financing 
DPI is more cost-effective in the long-term than existing investment methods for 
unfit, siloed digital schemes. In addition, states must also take steps to reform and 
modernize government workplace culture and collaboration, stabilize institutions, 
implement transparent procurement procedures, and make strategic investments 
in infrastructure, technology and, crucially, human capital. Governments should 
look to recruit and retain technical talent with strategic visa policy, upskilling 
opportunities and competitive salaries.
Useful models for increasing technical capacity include the UK’s Advanced Research 
and Invention Agency (ARIA) and Government Digital Services (GDS), both of which 
prioritize operational agility, innovative ‘sandboxing’ and independence. Another 
possibility is the creation of publicly mandated focused research organizations

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
30 Chatham House
(FROs), successful examples of which include the Large Hadron Collider and the 
Human Genome Project. DPI tends to flourish when public infrastructure creates 
space for private innovation. Open, modular technology allows startups and 
enterprises to build and innovate new products.
3. Identify use cases through cost–benefit analysis
Early use cases for DPI should be chosen on the basis of feasibility and national 
priorities. A coordinated analysis on the benefits of DPI should weigh long-term 
efficiency gains against upfront infrastructure costs. This will require coordination 
among significant government budget holders, digital regulators and sector-specific 
agencies to ensure accountability and alignment of incentives. For countries 
currently lagging behind DPI leaders in digital public service provision, there 
are significant opportunities in simply replicating existing DPI successes, 
where similar contexts exist. However, DPI is diverse, and examples like the 
Ukrainian government’s drive for services capable of functioning during conflict 
show that different governments will have differing priorities for building new 
digital foundations.
4. Plug into global DPI networks
A major strength of the DPI approach is that it enables countries to foster 
interoperability and collaborate across borders while preserving national autonomy. 
These alternative diplomatic channels are vital levers in the current, shifting global 
governance landscape. To boost interoperability and strengthen partnerships, 
once DPI capacity is established, countries should participate in emerging regional 
or sectoral DPI communities of practice that help set international technology 
standards that reflect national strategic priorities or values. Such initiatives include 
the Global Digital Compact, 50-in-5 initiative, Global Digital Health Certification 
Network, and Digital Public Goods Alliance.
Recommendations in practice
The UK government’s 2025 announcement of mandatory digital IDs demonstrates 
the political commitment needed for DPI implementation.70 This initiative could 
leverage existing institutional capacity, notably ARIA and the GDS, both of which 
have already built expertise in digital infrastructure. This capacity would need 
additional investment and a procurement process guided by the Digital, Data and 
Technology Playbook (UK government guidance for digital projects) to ensure the 
adoption of a suitable, safe public–private partnership for digital ID. 71
The government has identified a specific use case: right to work checks. While 
this provides a concrete starting point, for some, this limits the potential of the 
technology, which could have also extended to delivering better public services 
70 Prime Minister’s Office (2025), ‘New digital ID scheme to be rolled out across UK’, 26 September 2025, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-digital-id-scheme-to-be-rolled-out-across-uk.
71 Digital, Data and Technology Profession (2022), ‘The Digital, Data and Technology Playbook’, 28 March 2022, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-digital-data-and-technology-playbook.

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
31 Chatham House
in other areas such as healthcare or taxation. Ensuring interoperability across 
departments and embedding data sharing could help future-proof the digital ID 
for further expansion, and potentially improve delivery of public services, increase 
efficiency, reduce duplication and enhance governance. With a more digitally 
connected government, the UK could better understand and address complex 
societal challenges, such as social care, health disparities, quality of education 
and homelessness.
Public concerns around data privacy and government oversight must be addressed. 
This could be done through a system similar to the Data Empowerment and Protection 
Architecture, an India-developed proposal for a joint public-private oversight 
instrument that enables individuals to share their personal data with service 
providers and third parties through personalized and specific consent controls.72 
In India, the country’s instant payment sector is a diverse and competitive market, 
with platforms like Google Pay, PhonePe, Amazon Pay and BHIM, all offering 
instant, real-time transfers. These providers all have different data and privacy 
policies dictating the use of user’s data. The government has recognized this 
shortcoming. By consolidating and pooling consent mechanisms, governments, 
like those in India and the UK, could introduce a system with familiar and standard 
wording that is more likely to be trusted by users. By carefully designing systems with 
users’ needs, consent and interactions in mind, governments can create stronger 
foundations for trusted private sector partnerships and enable more advanced 
digital infrastructure, like secure, privacy-protected e-commerce platforms. This 
advancement would enable providers to reduce fraud and streamline processes 
while giving consumers greater control over their personal information.
Rather than developing digital ID systems in isolation, the UK should actively 
engage with the global DPI community. As this paper emphasizes, countries can 
learn lessons from existing DPI implementation, adopting proven vendors and 
building blocks, and participating in international standards-setting frameworks. 
The paper provides numerous examples of successful DPI deployments and 
collaborative initiatives that UK policymakers should study and engage with. 
This approach would help the UK avoid costly mistakes, accelerate implementation 
and ensure that a UK digital ID system benefits from best practice and adheres 
to international standards.
72 NITI Aayog (2020), Data Empowerment And Protection Architecture, August 2020, https://www.niti.gov.in/
sites/default/files/2023-03/Data-Empowerment-and-Protection-Architecture-A-Secure-Consent-Based.pdf.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
32 Chatham House
Annex 1
Existing digital solutions
This list is not exhaustive, but is an illustration of the diverse selection of existing 
digital building blocks and public goods in use worldwide in digital public 
infrastructure approaches.
Country/organization DPI name Online resource
India Aadhaar https:/ /uidai.gov.in
Worldwide (but supported 
by France)
CurrentAI currentai.org
Denmark Digital Post https:/ /en.digst.dk/systems/digital-post
Ukraine Diia https:/ /expo.diia.gov.ua
EU eIDAS https:/ /digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/discover-eidas
EU EU Digital COVID Certificate https:/ /commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/coronavirus-response/
safe-covid-19-vaccines-europeans/eu-digital-covid-certificate_en
EU EuroStack https:/ /eurostack.eu
Sri Lanka GOVPAY https:/ /govpay.lk/en
UK gov.uk https:/ /www.gov.uk
Saudi Arabia The Hajj health card https:/ /www.who.int/news/item/21-10-2024-who-global-network-expands- 
digital-health-certification-for-hajj-pilgrims
Brazil Identificação Civil Nacional https:/ /www.gov.br/governodigital/pt-br/legislacao/legislacao-identificacao- 
nacional-civil
Kenya (and now elsewhere) M-PESA https:/ /www.m-pesa.africa
Bangladesh myGov https:/ /www.mygov.bd
Togo NOVISSI https:/ /documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099751009222330502/pdf/
IDU0e83f857301ff1047bf082710a8d21ddf42c3.pdf
Brazil Pix https:/ /www.bcb.gov.br/en/financialstability/pix_en
Peru State Interoperability 
Platform (PIDE)
https:/ /www.gob.pe/741-plataforma-de-interoperabilidad-del-estado-pide
Singapore Singpass https:/ /www.singpass.gov.sg/main
Sri Lanka Sri Lanka Unique Digital 
Identity (SLUDI)
https:/ /www.icta.lk/projects/digital-government/sludi
Estonia X-Road https:/ /x-road.global

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
33 Chatham House
About the authors
Rowan Wilkinson is a research associate in the Digital Society Programme 
at Chatham House, where she conducts research on digital public infrastructure, 
the information space, technology sovereignty and AI governance. Her expertise lies 
at the intersection of technology, humanitarianism and international development.
Alex Krasodomski leads the Digital Society Programme at Chatham House. His 
research focuses on AI, emerging technology and centres of technological power. 
He leads work aimed at strengthening state capacity and cooperation, identifying 
feasible paths towards global technology governance, and on routes to market for 
public technology.
Isabella Wilkinson is a research fellow in the Digital Society Programme at 
Chatham House. Isabella’s work generally covers security and governance issues 
relating to cyberspace and technology, including international cyber and technology 
governance and processes, the online information environment, and advancing 
responsibility and inclusivity.

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
The case for expanding digital public infrastructure
How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money
34 Chatham House
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Co-Develop and, in particular, Lindsey Crumbaugh and 
Sourav Das, for their support for this project.
We would like to express our sincerest gratitude to the anonymous peer reviewers 
for their insights and constructive feedback. This paper also draws on roundtables 
and interviews held under the Chatham House Rule in 2025. The authors are 
grateful to all those who participated, giving their time and valuable comments.
Thanks are due to Chatham House’s Publications team and the staff of the 
Global Governance and Security Centre for their support, particularly Bianka 
Venkataramani, Jake Statham and Michael Tsang.

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical including photocopying, recording or any information storage or retrieval system, 
without the prior written permission of the copyright holder. Please direct all enquiries to the publishers.
Chatham House does not express opinions of its own. The opinions expressed in this publication 
are the responsibility of the author(s).
Copyright © The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2025
Cover image: A vegetable vendor waits for customers and displays a barcode for Paytm, an Indian mobile 
digital payment platform, at a market in New Delhi.
Photo credit: Copyright © Sajjad Hussain/AFP/Getty Images
ISBN 978 1 78413 660 4 
DOI 10.55317/9781784136604
Cite this paper: Wilkinson, R., Krasodomski, A. and Wilkinson, I. (2025), The case for expanding digital public 
infrastructure: How open, scalable technology can serve citizens, preserve sovereignty and save money, 
Research Paper, London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, https:/ /doi.org/10.55317/9781784136604.
This publication is printed on FSC-certified paper.
designbysoapbox.com

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
The Royal Institute of International Affairs 
Chatham House
10 St James’s Square, London SW1Y 4LE 
T +44 (0)20 7957 5700 
contact@chathamhouse.org | chathamhouse.org
Charity Registration Number: 208223
Independent thinking since 1920
