
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN
May 2026 JSTCRDS RESEARCH REPORTNew Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
RESEARCH REPORT
RESEARCH REPORT
New Trends in Science and 
Technology Innovation Policy from 
the Perspective of Science and 
Technology Diplomacy (2025)
調査報告書
科学技術外交からみた科学技術
イノ ベ ー シ ョン 政 策 の 新 潮 流（ 2 0 2 5 年 ）

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Introduction
This report provides an overview of science and technology innovation (STI) policy from the 
perspective of science and technology diplomacy, which is rapidly gaining importance and 
interest in the midst of changing global circumstances, interactions among nations, 
international frameworks, and trends in international organizations and forums that operate 
beyond national boundaries.
Ever since the emergence of modern science in the 17th century, various initiatives have been 
taken that both promote science and are motivated by diplomatic objectives. These efforts were 
conceptualized in a report titled “New Frontiers in Science Diplomacy”
1
 published in January 
2010, based on discussions at an international workshop held by The Royal Society and the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). This report described the three 
pillars of science diplomacy in terms of science in diplomacy, diplomacy for science, and science 
for diplomacy. Since then, various efforts have been made in science and technology diplomacy 
through science and technology innovation policies and foreign policies. Most recently, science 
and technology diplomacy affected by changes in geopolitical situations and the accelerating 
rate of progress in science and technology are having a dramatic effect on society and politics. 
Emerging technologies such as AI, quantum technology, semiconductors, and biotechnology 
are having a large impact as the results of basic research are being implemented in society in a 
very short time. Science and technology are no longer limited to the traditional objectives of 
solving social and economic problems, but are now deeply related to politics and national 
power. Due to the need for science and technology to address not only economic 
competitiveness but also global issues such as sustainability, resilience, quality of life, and 
security, STI policies continue to change while overlapping with industrial, security, and foreign 
policies, and STI-related organizations around the world are trying to establish science, 
technology, and innovation ecosystems through various initiatives and collaborations.
In light of these rapid changes in the global situation, the importance of science and 
technology diplomacy is increasing, and moves to explore new concepts, roles, and initiatives to 
adapt science and technology diplomacy to the changes that are taking place are gaining 
momentum. For example, the European Commission is promoting the development of an EU 
framework for science diplomacy. In January 2024, The Royal Society and AAAS announced in 
“Science Diplomacy – 15 Years On”
2
 that they would be making a year-long review of the three 
pillars of science and technology diplomacy proposed in 2010 and how they have been applied 
on various occasions since then, and in February 2025, a new report, “Science Diplomacy in an 
1 AAAS, “New Frontiers in Science Diplomacy,” https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/New_Frontiers.pdf
2
 AAAS, 
“Science Diplomacy — 15 Years On,” 
 
https://www.sciencediplomacy.org/editorial/2024/science-diplomacy-15-years
i
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN i

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Era of Disruption”
3
 was issued. This report proposed a simplified two-dimensional framework: 
Science impacting diplomacy—how science engages with diplomatic objectives, and diplomacy 
impacting science—how diplomacy engages with and influences scientific activities. By 
simplifying in this way, the aim is to create a more flexible framework that is adaptable to 
current and future challenges. The three key points for practicing science diplomacy are: (1) 
science diplomacy is an important tool for promoting international relations, (2) science 
diplomacy is increasingly being used by non-state actors such as private companies, and (3) 
science diplomacy is required in times of turmoil. Furthermore, interest in science and 
technology diplomacy is growing in the Global South, including India and ASEAN countries, and 
in March 2025, UNESCO is planning a ministerial-level meeting on science and technology 
diplomacy.
This report updates and expands parts of the “Global Trends in Science, Technology and 
Innovation Policy (2024)” and adds new trends. We hope that this report will help you recognize 
the growing global importance of science and technology in national strategies and policies 
from the perspective of science and technology diplomacy, and help you consider what 
measures Japan should adopt. Since the term “Science and Technology Diplomacy” is commonly 
used in Japan, while the term “Science Diplomacy” is used in Europe and the United States, this 
report will treat “Science and Technology Diplomacy” and “Science Diplomacy” in Europe and 
the United States as one and the same.
Figure 1   Global correlation of STI-related organizations
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
3
 AAAS, 
“Science diplomacy in an era of disruption,” 
 
https://www.aaas.org/news/science-diplomacy-era-disruption
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_ENii
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
ii

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
* The annotations in this document are based on confirmed access as of February 2025.
* Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) is referred to as JST
iii
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN iii

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Table of Contents
1 Scienc e & Technology Diplomacy......................................... 1
1.1 H ow the Concept of Science and Technology Diplomacy 
was Formed......................................................................... 1
1.2 Examining N ew Concepts of Science and Technology 
Diplomacy. ........................................................................... 3
Column1 A N ew Framework for Science and Technology Diplomacy: 
Science Diplomacy in an Era of Disruption (Royal Society/
AAAS) Overview. .......................................................................... 6
2 C ountry/Region Initiatives and Noteworthy Trends . ....... 9
2.1 Japan. .................................................................................... 9
Column2 A ctivities of Japan’s First Science and Technology Advisor to the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs. ......................................................... 11
2.2 United States. ...................................................................... 13
2.3 United King dom................................................................. 15
2.4 EU. ........................................................................................ 16
Column3 F irst European Conference on Science Diplomacy (December 
2023 in Madrid) Outcome Document. ...................................... 17
2.5 Global South. ....................................................................... 18
2.5.1 Gener al remarks . .............................................................................. 18
2.5.2 Scienc e and Technology Diplomacy Initiatives . ........................... 21
3 STI Issues Surrounding Science and Technology Diplomacy.... 24
3.1 Scienc e and Technology Diplomacy and the Scientific 
Advisory System. ................................................................. 24
3.2 Scienc e and Technology Diplomacy and Research 
Security. ............................................................................... 27
3.2.1 The Changing P ositions of Science and Technology and STI 
Policies in the Midst of the Changing Global Situation.............. 27
3.2.2 Ov erview of Efforts to Ensure Research Security in Major 
Countries. .......................................................................................... 29
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN v
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
v

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
3.2.3 Expected R ole of Science and Technology Diplomacy. ............... 34
4 Scienc e and Technology Diplomacy in 
the International F
ramework.................................................. 36
4.1 International N etwork for Governmental Science Advice 
(INGSA). .............................................................................. 36
4.2 F oreign Ministries Science & Technology Advice 
Network (FMSTAN)........................................................... 38
4.3 American Association f or the Advancement of Science 
(AAAS). ................................................................................ 39
4.4 Scienc e and Technology in Society forum . ...................... 41
4.5 W orld Scientific Congress(WSF) . ...................................... 42
Column4 1 1th World Science Forum (2024) Declaration: The interface 
between science and policy in a time of global transformation 
(Summary)................................................................................... 44
4.6 G eneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator(GESDA) . ..... 45
Conclusion ~Future Challenges and Prospects~. ............................ 47
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_ENvi
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
vi

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
1 Science & Technology Diplomacy
1.1 How the Concept of Science and Technology Diplomacy was Formed
Since the advent of modern science in the 17th century, various initiatives have been pursued, 
both to promote science and for diplomatic motives. These initiatives include, for example, 
international research cooperation, the establishment of international rules for the use of 
nuclear energy, space, and ocean development after World War II, and the operation of large 
international research facilities, such as the European Organization for Nuclear Research 
(CERN
1
, Geneva, Switzerland) established in 1954, the International Institute for Applied 
Systems Analysis (IIASA
2
, Vienna, Austria) established in 1964, ITER Organization (ITER, 
Cadarache, France
3
), the Human Frontier Science Program (HFSP
4
) proposed by Japan in 1987 
and launched in 1990, the International Space Station (ISS
5
), construction of which began in 
1998 and was completed in 2011, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC
6
), 
established in 1988, and the Synchrotron-light for Experimental Science and Applications in the 
Middle East (SESAME, Alan, Jordan) 
7
, which was officially opened in 2017. In addition, since 
1995, member countries of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), the international treaty on climate change, have annually convened their own 
supreme decision-making body, knows as the Conference of the Parties (COP). The IPCC 
provides scientific findings to the COP, which in turn uses these findings as the basis for national 
policy discussions and consensus building on specific policies. The IPCC’s capabilities and track 
record in bridging scientific knowledge and international political decision-making provides a 
model for building mechanisms for scientific and political relationships on various other global 
issues, such as biodiversity.
A major factor in the conceptualization of these efforts as “science and technology diplomacy” 
and their revitalization under science and technology innovation policy and foreign policy was a 
report published in January 2010, based on discussions at an international workshop held by 
The Royal Society and the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). The 
report is titled “New Frontiers in Science Diplomacy” 
8
 and states, “Science diplomacy is not new, 
1 CERN, “CERN” https://home.cern/
2
 IIASA, 
“International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis,” https://iiasa.ac.at/
3
 QST
, “ITER Progress” https://www.fusion.qst.go.jp/ITER/iter/page1_1.html
4
 International H
uman Frontier Science Program Organization (HFSPO), “HFSP,” https://www.hfsp.org/
5
 JAXA, 
“ISS” https://humans-in-space.jaxa.jp/iss/
6
 Japan Meteor
ological Agency, “Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change” 
 
https://www.data.jma.go.jp/cpdinfo/ipcc/index.html
7
 SESAME, 
“SESAME” https://www.sesame.org.jo/
8
 AAAS, 
“New Frontiers in Science Diplomacy,” https://www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/New_Frontiers.pdf
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 1
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
but it is more important than ever. Many of the issues that will define the 21st century, from 
climate change and food security to poverty reduction and nuclear disarmament, have a 
scientific dimension. No country can solve these problems on its own. The tools, techniques, and 
tactics of foreign policy must adapt to an increasingly scientifically and technologically complex 
world.” The report went further to propose three elements of science diplomacy: science in 
diplomacy, diplomacy for science, and science for diplomacy. Based on this, Europe, the U.S., 
and Japan have made contributions and established networks in various international 
frameworks, including the appointment of science advisors to heads of state, foreign ministers, 
and other ministers, and, in Japan, the creation of science-related positions such as science 
diplomacy envoys and technology ambassadors within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Figure 2).
Figure 2   Major events related to science and technology diplomacy
Japan Events World Events
1960s-80sThe Dawn of Scientific Advice
Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security 
between the United States and Japan(1960)
Pollution problems became more serious with 
rapid economic growth: Basic Act on Pollution 
Control (1967), Air Pollution Control Act (1968), 
and establishment of the Environmental Agency 
(1971)
UK appoints Government Chief Scientific Adviser (1964)
The United States establishes the Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (OSTP) in the Office of the President, 
evolving from the Office of Science and Technology 
organized in 1961.(1976)
Director of OSTP serves as Science Advisor to the 
President (scope of authority varies by administration)
The Silent Spring (1962) by R. Carson and “The Limits to 
Growth (1972)” Club of Rome Report are published as 
environmental issues became more apparent.
Growing international demand for a response to climate 
change
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC 
established (1988), UN Conference on Sustainable 
Development (Rio+20) (1992)
The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 
is adopted, and the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change and the Convention on 
Biological Diversity is signed.
1990s Society’s Expectations and Distrust of Science and Technology
Enactment of the Science and Technology Basic 
Law (1995) First Science and Technology Basic 
Plan (1996)
Growing distrust of science and technology: 
Monju sodium leak accident (1995), sarin gas 
attack on the subway (1995), Tokai-mura JOC 
criticality accident (1999), etc.
Human BSE infection in the U.K. becomes a social 
problem (1996) Kyoto Protocol adopted at COP3 (held 
annually since 1997)
World Science Forum (WSF) established with Budapest 
Declaration (1999) advocating “Science for Society”, 
meetings held every other year since 2003
2000s The Dawn of Science and Technology Diplomacy
Establishment of the Council for Science and 
Technology Policy (2001), Incorporation of 
national universities (2004),
Science and Technology in Society Forum (STS 
Forum) launched (2004), 
Science and Technology Research Partnership for 
Sustainable Development (SATREPS) launched 
(2008)
The United States establishes the first Science and 
Technology Advisor to the Secretary of State (1999)
The United Kingdom establishes the first Chief Scientific 
Adviser to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (2009)
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN2
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Japan Events World Events
2010s Promoting Science and Technology Diplomacy
Great East Japan Earthquake (2011)
The term “Science and Technology Diplomacy” 
appeared in the 4th Science and Technology Basic 
Plan (2012) and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
“Report of the Advisory Panel on Science and 
Technology Diplomacy” (2014)
Appointment of Mr. Teruo Kishi as the first Science 
and Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs (2015). New diplomatic contributions, 
starting with the 1st Symposium on Science and 
Technology Diplomacy in Tokyo (2016), the G7 
Ise-Shima Summit (2016), TICAD VI in Kenya 
(2016), and TICAD7 in Yokohama (2019), 
UN Multi-Stakeholder Forum on Science, 
Technology and Innovation for the Sustainable 
Development Goals (held annually since 2016), 
the G20 Osaka Summit agreement to create STI 
for SDGs roadmap (2019)
2nd Symposium on Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in Tokyo (2019)
The Royal Society and the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) advocate three types of 
science and technology diplomacy (2010)
Establishment of the International Network for 
Governmental Science Advice (INGSA) (2014)
UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted 
(2015)
Foreign Ministries Science & Technology Advice Network 
(FMSTAN) established (2016)
U.S. Trump administration comes to power (2017) → 
U.S.-China high-tech friction
FMSTAN founding members advocate three actions for 
science and technology diplomacy (2018)
International Council for Science (ICSU) and International 
Social Science Council (ISCC) merge to form International 
Science Council (ISC) (2018)
9th World Science Forum (WSF) in Budapest (2019)
⇒ Recognizing the importance of the Budapest 
Declaration of 20 years ago, advocates science that 
contributes to well-being, etc.
2020s Science and Technology Diplomacy in an Era of Geopolitical Tension
Yoichiro Matsumoto appointed as the second 
Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister 
of Foreign Affairs (2020) TICAD 8 in Tunisia 
(2022)
Mr. Kazuhito Hashimoto appointed as the first 
Science and Technology Advisor to the Cabinet of 
Japan (2022). He chaired the following 
international meetings: Science Advisers’ 
Roundtable 2022 in Kyoto, G7 Science Advisers’ 
Roundtable (2023 in the U.S.), Science Advisers’ 
Roundtable 2023 (in Kyoto)
Japan assumes the G7 chairmanship (2023-2024), 
Science and Technology Ministers agree on the 
importance of international brain circulation and 
the promotion of trustworthy scientific research 
through research integrity and security initiatives.
ASEAN-Japan Special Leaders’ Meeting (December 
2023 in Tokyo), 3rd Science and Technology 
Diplomacy Symposium (2024 in Tokyo)
Commencement of the 7th Science and 
Technology Innovation Strategy (FY2026-
FY2030)
Outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic (2020-)
Birth of the Biden administration (2021) → Return of the 
U.S. to science, technology, and international cooperation
Arati Prabhakar appointed OSTP Director and Science 
Advisor to the President (2022)
Angela MacLean appointed Chief Scientific Adviser to 
the UK Government (2023) 
Russian invasion of Ukraine (2022-)
OECD Committee on Science and Technology Policy 
(CSTP) publishes its core report “STI Outlook 2023” 
(2023)
OECD Ministerial Council adopts “Indo-Pacific 
Framework” (2023) 
Israel-Hamas conflict (2023-)
First EU Science Diplomacy Conference (2023)
OECD Science and Technology Policy Committee 
Ministerial Meeting (2024) 
Second Trump Administration (2025)
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
1.2 Examining New Concepts of Science and Technology Diplomacy
In 2017, Teruo Kishi, then Science and Technology Advisor to Japan’s Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, and four science advisors from the United States, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand 
jointly proposed a new conceptual framework for practice to replace the traditional taxonomy: 1) 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 3
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
actions directly related to pursuing national interests, 2) actions that address cross-border 
interests, and 3) actions that respond to global demands and challenges. In addition, they 
recommended that since science and technology diplomacy is an important element of 
diplomacy for all countries, regardless of their size or stage of development, governments 
should promote collaboration among related institutions, including diplomacy, trade, 
development cooperation, and security, and position science and technology as a major 
instrument
9
.
In light of the rapidly changing global situation, the importance of science and technology 
diplomacy is growing, and there is an active movement to explore new concepts, roles, and 
initiatives for science and technology diplomacy adapted to the ongoing changes (Figure 3). 
The European Commission is promoting the development of a science diplomacy framework for 
the EU. The Royal Society and AAAS published an editorial titled “Science Diplomacy – 15 years 
on” in January 2024, announcing that the three elements of science and technology diplomacy 
proposed in 2010 will be reviewed on various occasions over the next year. A special issue of 
Science Diplomacy was published in October 2024, and a new report, “Science Diplomacy in an 
Era of Disruption,” was issued in February 2025. The report proposed a simplified framework 
with two dimensions: Science impacting diplomacy: How science relates to diplomatic 
objectives, and Diplomacy impacting science: How diplomacy engages and influences scientific 
activities. The report laid out three important points for the practice of science diplomacy that 
aims to simplify and create a more flexible framework that is adaptable to current and future 
challenges: (1) Science diplomacy is an important tool to promote international relations, (2) 
Science diplomacy is increasingly being used by non-state actors, and (3) Science diplomacy is 
required in times of turmoil. (See Column 1 for a summary of the report.)
In addition, the Global South, including India and ASEAN countries, is also increasingly 
interested in science and technology diplomacy, and held a ministerial-level meeting on science 
and technology diplomacy at UNESCO in March 2025 (see Chapter 2, 2.5 for more on science 
and technology diplomacy in the Global South).
9 Gluckman, Peter D., Vaughan C. Turekian, Robin W. Grimes, and Teruo Kishi. “Science Diplomacy: A Pragmatic 
Perspective from the Inside.” Science & Diplomacy 6.4 (2017): 1–13. 
 
https://www.sciencediplomacy.org/sites/default/files/pragmatic_perspective_science_advice_dec2017_1.pdf
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN4
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Figure 3   Discussion forums related to science and technology diplomacy
Time of year Contents
May 2023 G7 Leaders’ Summit (in Hiroshima): Adoption of the Leaders’ Communiqué on “Promoting 
International Mobility and Circulation of Human Resources” in science and technology.
September 
2023
G20 Leaders’ Summit (in India) “Creating a Global Science Advisory Mechanism with 
Science Diplomacy as a Tool”, the outcome document of the G20 Chief Science Advisors’ 
Roundtable adopted as an annex.
October 2023 STS Forum (in Kyoto) Then-Prime Minister Kishida mentions in his opening remarks that 
“Science diplomacy is indispensable.” Science Advisers’ Roundtable held.
December 2023 1st European Science Diplomacy Conference (in Madrid, Spain)
January 2024 In Science & Diplomacy, AAAS and The Royal Society announce a review of the science 
diplomacy framework for 2025 in the article “Science Diplomacy - 15 Years On”.
February 2024 AAAS Annual Meeting (in Denver, USA). AAAS, EU, and others hold sessions on science 
and technology diplomacy
March 2024 The 3rd Symposium on Science and Technology Diplomacy (in Tokyo) organized by 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan and JST
April 2024 OECD Committee on Science and Technology Policy (CSTP) Ministerial Level Meeting
Japan ASEAN High-Level Roundtable on Science, Technology and Innovation (side event)
May 2024 International Network for Governmental Science Advice (INGSA) meeting and Foreign 
Ministries Science & Technology Advice Network (FMSTAN) meeting (in Kigali, Rwanda)
May 2024 9th UN Multi-Stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation for the 
Sustainable Development Goals (in NY, USA)
May 2024 GRC (Global Research Council) Annual Meeting (in Interlaken, Switzerland)
August 2024 Science Diplomacy Workshop for Early to Mid-Career Researchers in ASEAN Plus Three 
(Co-organized by AAAS, TWAS, and TSRI, in Thailand)
October 2024
STS Forum (in Kyoto)
In a video message, Prime Minister Ishiba advocates accelerating international human 
resource exchange (international brain circulation) while ensuring research security amid 
the growing importance of international science and technology cooperation and science 
and technology diplomacy.
October 2024 Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator (GESDA) Annual Meeting (in Geneva, 
Switzerland)
November 2024
World Science Forum 2024 (in Budapest, Hungary)
Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF) holds an event to report on the “Asia-Europe Science and 
Technology Diplomacy Report” (side event)
January 2025 2nd OECD Open Seminar in Tokyo, hosted by JST
February 2025 AAAS Annual Meeting (in Boston, USA), AAAS and The Royal Society Announce New 
Science and Technology Diplomacy Framework
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 5
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Column 1
A New Framework for Science and Technology 
Diplomacy: Science Diplomacy in an Era of 
Disruption (Royal Society/AAAS) Overview
* The report has been summarized by CRDS. Underlining added by 
CRDS.
We are living in times of turmoil. The geopolitical landscape is 
becoming increasingly confrontational, power is more widely dispersed, 
and relations among major powers are more competitive. The global 
scientific and technological landscape is changing rapidly, and with it, 
science and technology are becoming even more important to national 
governments for economic growth and international competitiveness. 
Intertwined with this turmoil are environmental issues such as climate 
change and loss of biodiversity, which continue to pose significant 
threats to life on Earth. In these times of change and uncertainty, we 
need a framework for the practice of science diplomacy that accurately 
recognizes the real world, can be used by both state and non-state actors, 
and enables practitioners from diplomats to industrial leaders to address 
challenges and seize new opportunities in a confusing world.
In 2010, The Royal Society and the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) published a report titled “New Frontiers 
in Science Diplomacy”, which proposed the following three aspects as a 
framework for science diplomacy. Science in Diplomacy, Diplomacy for 
Science and Science for Diplomacy. This report is still widely cited and 
discussed today.
However, as the world becomes more fragmented and complex, 
effective science diplomacy must be increased to ensure that the 
conceptual framework is conducive to practical application. A science 
diplomacy framework should focus on the interaction between science 
and diplomacy. To this end, we propose a simpler framework that 
organizes the relationship between science and diplomacy into the 
following two aspects. 
Two Dimensions of the Proposed Science Diplomacy Framework
Science impacting diplomacy: How science relates to diplomatic 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN6
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
objectives.
Diplomacy impacting science: How diplomacy engages and influences 
scientific activities.
These two dimensions do not imply that there are only two ways to 
engage science and diplomacy, but rather provide a framework that 
encompasses a variety of ways in which science engages with diplomacy 
and diplomacy engages with science.
By simplifying the framework, AAAS and The Royal Society aim to 
create a more flexible framework that is adaptable to current and future 
challenges. In considering the new framework, three key points regarding 
the practice of science diplomacy were also identified. 
1. 
 Scienc
e diplomacy is an important tool to promote international 
relations: Scientists seek to gain and apply new knowledge about the 
world. On the other hand, the practice of diplomacy always involves 
the pursuit of the interests of nations and organizations. When the 
interests of both parties are aligned, science and diplomacy can 
achieve great results, as many practical examples, such as climate 
change assessments and the construction and operation of large-
scale infrastructure, demonstrate. In the 2010 report, the discussion 
revolves around these positive interactions, which may create the 
perception that “science diplomacy is always positive and a tool to 
be used for the global public good.” In practice, however, this is not 
always the case. Science diplomacy is a tool to achieve the diplomatic 
objectives of a nation or organization, and whether those objectives 
are perceived positively depends on one’s point of view.
2. 
 Scienc
e diplomacy is increasingly used by non-state actors: Science 
diplomacy for national and international purposes has traditionally 
been implemented by diplomats representing national governments. 
In recent years, however, non-state actors, particularly global 
technology companies, have been using science diplomacy to 
develop their own “diplomacy”. This trend indicates that the interests 
of corporations may not necessarily coincide with those of nations.
3. 
 T
imes of turmoil call for scientific diplomacy: Modern society is 
being profoundly transformed by innovations in science, engineering, 
and technology, including the rapid development of AI. As regulatory 
and governance frameworks fail to keep pace, the giant corporations 
that develop and supply these technologies are pursuing their own 
diplomatic activities. The open system of international scientific 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 7
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
cooperation is being used in some cases to strengthen the military 
capabilities of certain countries, raising concerns about the security 
of research. And, underdeveloped areas once considered the focus 
of scientists’ research, such as the deep sea, the polar regions, the 
moon, and outer space, are now becoming the subject of political 
competition. In addition, measures to address global challenges such 
as climate change, loss of biodiversity, and global poverty remain 
inadequate. With more than 8 billion people living on the planet 
today, the greatest threats facing present and future generations 
remain unresolved. At these critical moments, science diplomacy 
will play an increasingly important role for both state and non-state 
actors.
Summary of Discussions
In preparing this report, input was received from a wide range of 
stakeholders through roundtables, conferences, and international 
events. The main points made are as follows. Science and diplomacy 
are increasingly closely linked. Science is becoming more important in 
foreign policy, and diplomacy increasingly needs to work with science. 
The interests of science and diplomacy do not necessarily coincide. 
Conflicts can arise because scientists pursue knowledge and diplomats 
pursue national interests. Scientific values that have been considered 
universal are being reevaluated. This has implications for the nature of 
international scientific cooperation and the practice of science diplomacy. 
Awareness of national security risks is required in scientific cooperation. 
The roles and responsibilities of practitioners of science diplomacy 
need to be clarified. Trust in science and scientific advice is challenged. 
Non-state actors play an important role in science diplomacy. More 
comprehensive international scientific cooperation is required.
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN8
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science & Technology 
Diplomacy
1

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
2 Country/Region Initiatives and Noteworthy 
Trends
2.1 Japan
In April 2007, at the then Council for Science and Technology Policy meeting, expert members 
submitted a proposal titled “Toward Strengthening Science and Technology Diplomacy”
10
, 
which stated, “It is important to enhance Japan’s soft power by making full use of its science and 
technology capabilities and actively and continuously addressing global challenges to realize a 
sustainable society, and to link research and technology cooperation with diplomacy.” In May 
2008, a report with the same title
11
 was compiled, which led to the establishment of the Science 
and Technology Research Partnership for Sustainable Development (SATREPS) to promote 
international science and technology cooperation using ODA. Through SATREPS, JST and the 
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED), in collaboration with the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), continue to promote international joint research and 
human resource development between Japan and developing countries to solve global-scale 
issues. In addition, JST and AMED have been supporting various types of international research 
cooperation in research funding programs related to science and technology diplomacy, such as 
the Strategic International Collaborative Research Program (SICORP, launched in 2009)
12
 and 
the e-ASIA Collaborative Research Program (launched in 2012). In addition, most recently, 
ASPIRE (Adopting Sustainable Partnerships for Innovative Research Ecosystem)
13
 was launched 
in 2023, and the Japan-ASEAN Science, Technology and Innovation Cooperation Project 
(Networked Exchange, United Strength for Stronger Partnerships between Japan and ASEAN 
(NEXUS))
14
 was launched in 2024. ASPIRE aims to maintain and improve Japan’s science and 
technology capabilities by connecting top researchers from Japan and other advanced science 
and technology countries and regions through international joint research in seven policy-
important science and technology fields (AI and information, biotechnology, energy, materials, 
quantum, semiconductors, and communications). NEXUS also aims to take advantage of the 
50th anniversary of the ASEAN-Japan Friendship Cooperation to promote flexible and 
multilayered science and technology cooperation that leverages the strengths of both sides, to 
further strengthen mutual sustainable research cooperation, and to grow as a partner in co-
creating innovation.
10 Cabinet Offic e, “Toward Strengthening Science and Technology Diplomacy.” 
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/siryo/haihu66/siryo1.pdf
11
 Cabinet Offic
e, “Toward Strengthening Science and Technology Diplomacy.” 
 
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/output/080519iken-5.pdf
12
 JST
, “Outline of SICORP” https://www.jst.go.jp/inter/program/structure/general.html
13
 JST
, “Outline of ASPIRE” https://www.jst.go.jp/aspire/about.html
14
 JST
, “Outline of NEXUS” https://www.jst.go.jp/aspire/nexus/about/index.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 9
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
At the policy level, the Fourth Science and Technology Basic Plan
15
, which was launched in 
2012, includes the following four items under “New Development of Science and Technology 
Diplomacy”: (1) Development of international activities that leverage Japan’s strengths, (2) 
Promotion of international activities related to advanced science and technology, (3) Promotion 
of coordination and cooperation with developing countries on global-scale issues, and (4) 
Strengthening of the infrastructure for developing international activities in science and 
technology. The 6th Science, Technology and Innovation Basic Plan (FY2021-FY2025) calls for 
the promotion of strategic science and technology diplomacy, including “strategic cooperation 
and collaboration in key cutting-edge fields,” “strengthening the infrastructure supporting the 
strategic development of science and technology diplomacy,” and “building an international 
research network in which Japan plays a central role.” As of February 2025, the 7th Science, 
Technology and Innovation Basic Plan (FY2026 - FY2030) is under consideration. In formulating 
the 7th Science, Technology and Innovation Basic Plan, it is necessary to keep in mind that the 
surrounding environment is very different from that of the 6th Basic Plan formulated five years 
ago, including changes in the global situation and rapid development of emerging key 
technologies, and there is an increasing need to consider the plan in light of international 
trends. 
One of the initiatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan is the establishment of the 
position of Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In September 
2015, then Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida appointed Teruo Kishi (Professor Emeritus, The 
University of Tokyo) as the first Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, based on the recommendation of the Advisory Panel of Experts on Science and 
Technology Diplomacy (chaired by Takashi Shiraishi, then President of National Graduate 
Institute for Policy Studies). Mr. Kishi served as Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister 
of Foreign Affairs for approximately four and a half years until March 2020, and Mr. Yoichiro 
Matsumoto (Professor Emeritus, University of Tokyo) was appointed as the second Science and 
Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs in April 2020. In the meantime, Mitsunobu 
Kano (Professor, Okayama University) served as Deputy Science and Technology Advisor to the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2019-2022, and Motoko Kotani (Professor, Tohoku University) 
was appointed as his successor in 2022. Currently, Yoichiro Matsumoto and Motoko Kotani are 
engaged in a variety of important activities, including “the establishment of Science and 
Technology Fellows at diplomatic missions abroad”
16
 and “proposals on Science and Technology 
Diplomacy and ODA”
17
. In March 2023, the 3rd Science and Technology Diplomacy Symposium 
was held in Tokyo to discuss science and technology diplomacy in an era of change with 
15 Cabinet Offic e, “Basic Plan for Science and Technology” 
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/kihonkeikaku/4honbun.pdf
16
 Ministry
 of Foreign Affairs of Japan, “Establishment of Science and Technology Fellows in Overseas 
Establishments.” https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/dns/isc/page22_004113.html
17
 Ministry
 of Foreign Affairs of Japan, “Courtesy call on Foreign Minister Kamikawa by Yoichiro Matsumoto, 
Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs on Science and Technology, etc.” 
 
https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/press/release/pressit_000001_00681.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN10
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
speakers from the US, Thailand, and the EU. 
Column 2
Activities of Japan’s First Science and Technology 
Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Teruo Kishi, the first Science and Technology Advisor to the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan, was active for four and a half years. A 
summary of his activities follows.
Providing Scientific Advice to Diplomacy (Science in Diplomacy)
● Contribution to the Outcome Document of the G7 Ise-Shima Summit
● Two recommendations and concrete results for TICADVI and TICAD7
● Two recommendations and concrete results for promoting STI for SDGs
● Recommendations on the use of scientific knowledge in the Arctic
● Three papers co-authored with science and technology advisors from 
other countries
● Examination of the role of science and technology advisors through the 
holding of two symposiums on science and technology diplomacy
Dissemination of Japan’s science and technology innovation trends both 
domestically and internationally (Diplomacy for Science)
● Events held by the Cabinet Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(diplomatic missions abroad) to promote Japanese science and 
technology in other countries (SIP projects, etc.) (14 times)
● Speaking at domestic and international conferences (75 times)
● Dissemination within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (to improve 
science and technology literacy)
Networking with domestic and international science and technology 
professionals (Science for Diplomacy)
● Launch and participation in FMSTAN (Foreign Ministries Science and 
Technology Advice Network)
● Exchange of views with dignitaries from various countries (including 
ministerial-level dignitaries)
● Promotion of cooperation with domestic science and technology 
related parties (Ministries, Agencies, and Corporations)
In promoting the above, Mr. Kishi visited 23 countries, exchanged 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 11
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
views with science and technology executives and researchers more 
than 100 times in Japan and abroad, and spoke at related symposiums 
and international conferences more than 70 times. In addition, at the 
2nd Symposium on Science and Technology Diplomacy organized in 
December 2019, he proposed the following as the direction of future 
science and technology diplomacy.
(1) 
 In 
the midst of the advancing digital revolution, while science and 
technology diplomacy based on scientific evidence data has been 
promoted in the past, the promotion of science and technology 
diplomacy with data science at its core, including rule formation, 
should be strengthened more than ever in the future. Science and 
technology diplomacy must contribute to the realization of Society 
5.0 and the achievement of the SDGs, avoiding a negative social 
direction due to data monopolies and digital despotism.
(2) 
 H
owever, it is also necessary to distinguish between “science 
diplomacy” and “technology diplomacy,” bearing in mind the rise 
of emerging technologies in security (global security) and the 
existence of countries and regions that do not necessarily share the 
same ethical values in science. It is also necessary to distinguish 
between “science diplomacy” and “technology diplomacy”.
(3) 
 Scienc
e and technology capability is the greatest tool for Japan’s 
science and technology diplomacy, and the research system should 
be strengthened by considering the “Japanese model” rather than 
simply imitating Western systems. Similarly, in promoting science 
and technology diplomacy, a medium- to long-term vision should 
be strategically formulated based on the “Japanese model,” and 
this vision should be widely disseminated both domestically and 
internationally.
(4) 
 In
 order to put the above into practice, it is essential that 
appropriate budgetary measures be taken. In addition, it is 
necessary to strengthen cooperation with various sectors, such as 
related ministries, research institutes, universities, and industries, 
and to develop human resources. Furthermore, cooperation 
within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be strengthened 
with related departments and diplomatic missions abroad, and 
consideration should be given to increasing the number of science 
and technology attachés in diplomatic missions abroad.
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN12
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
2.2 United States
In 2000, then U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright pioneered the establishment of a 
Science and Technology Advisor position to the Secretary of State and a supporting Office of the 
Science and Technology Adviser. This was in response to a 1999 report by the National Research 
Council (NRC) that recommended “the creation of a senior advisor to the Secretary of State to 
provide direct advice on matters related to science, technology, and health care,” and the 
establishment of an Office of the Science and Technology Adviser to the Secretary of State to 
provide direct advice to the Secretary of State. The report also responded to the enactment of 
federal legislation requiring the Secretary of State to have a Science and Technology Advisor 
who advises the Secretary of State directly. Former Science and Technology Advisors to the 
Secretary of State are shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4   Science and Technology Advisor to successive Secretaries of State
Term 
(years) Name Special field Main previous jobs
2000－
2003 Norman Neureiter Organic 
chemistry
Scientific Attaché in Warsaw and Bonn
Vice President, Texas Instruments. Assistant to the 
Nixon Administration’s Science Advisor for International 
Affairs.
2003－
2007 George Atkinson Photochemistry Science Fellow, American Physical Society Professor, 
University of Arizona
2007－
2010 Nina Fedoroff Molecular 
biology Professor, Pennsylvania State University
2011－
2014 William Colglazier Theoretical 
physics
Chief Operating Officer of the National Research Council 
and the National Academy of Sciences. Assistant to the 
Congressman by the National Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) Congressional Science 
Fellowship, Professor at the University of Tennessee, 
and Editor-in-Chief of Science & Diplomacy magazine
2015－
2017 Vaughan Turekian
Environmental 
science 
atmospheric 
chemistry
Chief International Officer, AAAS Director, AAAS Center 
for Science and Technology Diplomacy
Special Assistant to the Under Secretary for 
International Affairs, Department of State
2019－
2020 Mung Chiang
Electrical 
engineering 
mathematics
Professor of Engineering, Princeton University Dean of 
Engineering, Purdue University
2023－
2025 Patricia Gruber Ocean physics Director of Research, Office of Naval Research (ONR)
* Mr. Gruber resigned in January 2025, and as of February 2025, State Department employee Allison Schwier is acting 
Science and Technology Advisor to the Secretary of State. State Department staff (Frances Colón, Matt Chessen, and 
Allison Schwier, respectively) served as Acting Science and Technology Advisor to the Secretary of State in 2014-2015, 
2017-2019, and 2021-2023.
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN
13
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Colglazier, the fourth Science and Technology Advisor to the Secretary of State, described the 
role of the Secretary of State’s Office of Science and Technology Advisor (STAS), saying, “It 
assists the State Department, but it is not an operating bureau. Its goal is to strengthen the 
science and technology knowledge base within the department, anticipate science and 
technology issues that may affect foreign policy, advocate science-based decisions in all 
countries, and support global science and technology engagement that serves U.S. interests.”
18
 
Patricia Gruber was appointed Science Advisor to the Secretary of State in September 2023, but 
resigned in January 2025, and as of February 2025, Allison Schwier, a State Department 
employee, is the Acting Advisor. Immediately after her appointment, in November 2023, Ms. 
Gruber became Chair of the Foreign Ministries Science and Technology Advice Network 
(FMSTAN) (described in detail in Chapter 2, 3.1), where she worked to strengthen the network 
of science advisors in each country.
The U.S. State Department’s major initiatives include the U.S. Science Envoy Program and the 
Embassy Science Fellows Program. The former, launched in 2010, appoints six to seven eminent 
scientists as Science Envoys to promote international cooperation, expand human resource 
networks, and solve common problems by holding conferences on topics related to foreign 
policy and science and technology innovation, and by visiting other countries. Approximately 30 
people were appointed by 2022, and seven new appointments were made in 2023
19
. The latter 
program sends an average of 50 scientists to U.S. diplomatic missions abroad each year. Since its 
inception in 2001, approximately 550 fellows have participated in this program, contributing to 
diplomatic activities in the field of science and technology
20
. In January 2023, the Office of the 
Special Envoy was also established to formulate and coordinate foreign policy on important 
emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), quantum information science, and 
biotechnology.
In addition, the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) has a 
significant presence in U.S. science and technology diplomacy. The AAAS established the Center 
for Science Diplomacy in 2008, and in 2010, in collaboration with The Royal Society, advocated 
the three elements of current science and technology diplomacy. In addition, the AAAS 
publishes the journal 
Science Diplomacy
21
, provides training courses for developing countries in 
collaboration with the World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), is a leading advocate of the UN STI 
for SDGs Forum, and is involved in the World Science Forum (WSF). Most recently, together with 
The Royal Society, it published a new report, “Science diplomacy in an era of disruption” in 
February 2025 (see Chapter 1, 1.2). The AAAS also takes advantage of its non-governmental 
18 Scienc e, “Science and Diplomacy,” https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/science.1220355
19
 DoS, 
“Announcement of New Cohort of U.S. Science Envoys,” 
 
https://www.state.gov/announcement-of-new-cohort-of-u-s-science-envoys/
20
 DoS, 
“Embassy Science Fellows Program,” 
 
https://www.state.gov/programs-office-of-science-and-technology-cooperation/embassy-science-
f
ellowsprogram/
21
 AAAS, 
“Science & Diplomacy,” https://www.sciencediplomacy.org/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN14
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
status to promote scientific collaboration with Cuba, the former Soviet Union
22
, North Korea
23
, 
China
24
, and other countries (AAAS activities are detailed in Chapter 3, 3.3.).
2.3 United Kingdom
In 2009, the United Kingdom appointed theoretical chemist David Clary, a professor at Oxford 
University, as the first Principal Scientific Advisor to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
25
 
He was succeeded by materials physicist Robin Grimes, Professor of Materials Physics at Imperial 
College, from 2013-2018
26
. The two actively interacted with and contributed to various 
diplomacy efforts, including Japan, at the dawn of science and technology diplomacy. As of 
February 2025, Charlotte Watts, Professor in Social and Mathematical Epidemiology at the 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, is the UK Foreign Office’s Chief Science 
Advisor. In addition to the Chief Science Advisor, the UK has established science advisors in the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other ministries, working closely with them. Although science 
and technology diplomacy is led by the Principal Advisor to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Angela McLean, Chief Scientific Adviser to the Government, who took office in April 2023, is also 
engaged in promoting international collaboration and building international relations.
In its “Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development, and Foreign Policy (2021)”
27
, the 
UK government states that it will position science as the foundation of the UK’s ability to address 
societal challenges and boost prosperity, and maintain the UK’s position at the cutting edge of 
science and technology, and that collective action with allies and partners and co-creation will be 
crucial over the next decade. In November 2022, the UK Parliamentary Office of Science and 
Technology updated its 2018 policy paper on science and technology diplomacy
28
, stating that 
addressing technological change and new geopolitical tensions also requires innovative diplomatic 
approaches, and that, for example, some academia are seeking to work with partners in authoritarian 
regimes with clear they are calling for the definition of rules and instruments, stating.
22 AAAS, “Event | U.S.-Soviet Scientific Cooperation: A Look at the History and Lessons for Science Engagement 
for the Future,” 
 
https://www.aaas.org/events/event-us-soviet-scientific-cooperation-look-history-and-lessons-
scienc
eengagement-future
23
 AAAS, 
“Event | A Peace of Science: Diplomacy with North Korea,” 
 
https://www.aaas.org/events/event-peace-science-diplomacy-north-korea-0
24
 AAAS, 
“Connecting Scientific Communities: AAAS Travels to China,” 
 
https://www.aaas.org/news/connecting-scientific-communities-aaas-travels-china
25
 The R
oyal Society, “David Clary,” https://royalsociety.org/people/david-clary-11232/
26
 GO
V.UK, “New Chief Scientific Adviser for the FCO – Prof Robin Grimes appointed,” 
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-chief-scientific-adviser-for-the-fco-prof-robin-grimes-appointed
27
 GO
V.UK, “Global Britain in a Competitive Age: the Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development and 
Foreign Policy,” 
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/global-britain-in-a-competitive-age-the-integrated-review-
ofsecurity-def
ence-development-and-foreign-policy
28
 UK P
arliament, “Science Diplomacy,” https://post.parliament.uk/science-diplomacy/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 15
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
2.4 EU
In the EU, the term “science diplomacy” first appeared in a 2012 report from the European 
Commission to European governments entitled “Strengthening and focusing EU international 
cooperation in research and innovation: a strategic approach”. The report states that science 
diplomacy “will revitalize international cooperation in research and innovation as a soft power 
instrument and as a mechanism to improve relations with key countries and regions”. This 
concept was further developed in the 2016 report “Open Innovation, Open Science, Open to the 
World: a European Vision”, which calls for “international research leading to common standards, 
exchange and mobility of science, sharing of resources and facilities, scientific advice to 
diplomats and diplomatic scientists, and innovation cooperation to support good governance 
and policymaking and to help build mutual relationships”. In 2017, the European Commission 
concluded through its study “Tools for EU Science Diplomacy” that science diplomacy efforts in 
Europe remain largely uncoordinated, and that diplomatic and security policies, and an 
appropriate EU Science Diplomacy Strategy and related action plan were needed to support it. 
In response, the European Commission implemented three research projects under the Horizon 
2020 program.
● Using Science for/in Diplomacy for Addressing Global Challenges (S4D4C) (2018-2021)
● Inventing a Shared Science Diplomacy for Europe (InsSciDE) (2018-2021)
● European Leadership in Cultural, Science and Innovation Diplomacy (EL-CSID) (2016-2019)
All of this has led to a much better understanding of European science diplomacy, the 
consideration of options, the development of training materials and statements such as the 
Madrid Declaration on Science Diplomacy, and the creation of The European Union Science 
Diplomacy Alliance
29
. Science and technology diplomacy efforts are also underway at the 
regional and local level, as evidenced by the creation of the SciTech DiploHub by the city of 
Barcelona.
In May 2021, the European Commission presented a new strategy for international 
cooperation in science and technology, the “Global Approach to Research and Innovation”, to 
jointly tackle global challenges in areas such as climate change, digital transition, and health. 
This reaffirmed the EU’s commitment to cooperation based on common values. The strategy 
calls for reciprocity and a level playing field as a basis for building trust with international 
partners and stresses “the need to strengthen the emphasis on science and technology in the 
EU’s foreign and security policy in the context of ‘science diplomacy’”. The Council then asked 
the European Commission and the European External Action Service “to prepare and submit to 
the Council a European Science Diplomacy Agenda; to consider designating a science contact 
point to ensure that EU delegations have adequate science competence; and to promote 
cooperation with third country science advisors in member states”. In response, the European 
29 EU Scienc e Diplomacy Alliance, “The European Union Science Diplomacy Alliance,” 
https://www.science-diplomacy.eu/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN16
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Commission established a Working Group on Science Diplomacy in November 2023 with the 
aim of developing potential elements of a future European science diplomacy framework, and is 
currently studying the formation of a “European Science Diplomacy Framework (tentative 
name)”. As part of these studies, Spain, which holds the Presidency of the Council of Europe, 
and the European Commission jointly held the 1st European Science Diplomacy Conference in 
Madrid in December 2023, which provided one direction for future international discussions on 
science diplomacy, emphasizing hard power as well as soft power as the objective of science 
diplomacy
30
. In February 2025, an expert report entitled “A European Framework for Science 
Diplomacy” was published. It also stated that the 2nd European Conference on Science 
Diplomacy will be held in 2025.
Column 3
First European Conference on Science Diplomacy 
(December 2023 in Madrid) Outcome Document
* Summary of documents published on the website by CRDS
Given the rapidly evolving geopolitical and technological landscape, 
Europe needs to act strategically and develop an ambitious European 
framework for science diplomacy.
● This framework should build on the impressive legacy of European 
science diplomacy and the number of existing activities and initiatives 
at the EU level and in Member States.
● The framework should draw on the expertise and skills of the rapidly 
growing community of scholars and practitioners of European science 
diplomacy.
● The framework should identify synergies and maximize the EU’s added 
value from joint action through appropriate linkages between research 
and foreign policy instruments and the creation of space for exchange 
between the scientific and diplomatic communities.
● The framework should serve to define the principles that should form 
the basis for European science diplomacy action, based on the EU’s 
global approach to research and innovation.
● This framework should rethink European science diplomacy in a 
fragmented and multipolar world and reflect the use of science 
30 EU, “European Science Diplomacy Conference,” https://eu-science-diplomacy.service-facility.eu/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 17
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
diplomacy as soft and hard power, based on the concept of being as 
open as possible but closed as necessary.
● The framework needs to reflect how European diplomacy can be more 
strategic, effective, and resilient by leveraging scientific evidence and 
foresight, including enabling diplomacy to address the opportunities 
and risks of disruptive technologies.
● The framework should promote the development of science-based 
solutions to address the growing pressures by public and private actors 
on the global commons, including the Arctic, oceans, and low orbit, and 
support rules-based multilateralism.
● The framework must leverage the impact of research and innovation to 
address systemic global challenges such as climate change, biodiversity 
loss, and environmental pollution to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals and thereby create better lives for all.
● The framework should strengthen the role of science diplomacy in 
the diplomatic missions of the EU and its Member States, including 
through science advisors, and promote the EU’s global science 
diplomacy activities, for example by engaging with diaspora scientists 
and graduates of migration programs.
● This framework would build on the successful example of the 
Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area 
(PRIMA) to promote relations with the European neighborhood as well 
as with strategic partners in other world regions, such as Latin America 
and the Caribbean. It will also promote the development of new 
partnerships in the Mediterranean region, such as the European Union 
Africa, and the Indo-Pacific.
● The framework should serve to promote capacity building in European 
science diplomacy through the training of scientists, diplomats, and 
their counterparts, and through advancing the frontiers of science 
diplomacy through interdisciplinary research, including in the social 
sciences and humanities.
2.5 Global South
2.5.1 General remarks
There is no clear definition or list of nations comprising the “Global South”, but the term is 
generally used to refer to developing countries (due to the fact that most developing countries 
are located in the Southern Hemisphere), and is used in this paper to refer to nations such as 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN18
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
those found in the G77, a UN negotiating group
31
.
The G7 and other Western industrialized countries have begun to take a more concrete stance 
toward countries in the Global South, whose position in the international community and 
economic power are increasing, to strengthen cooperation. The OECD held a Ministerial Council 
meeting in June 2023 (chaired by the UK) under the theme “Securing a Resilient Future: 
Common Values and Global Partnerships” and adopted the “OECD Indo-Pacific Strategic 
Framework”. The Framework positions the Indo-Pacific region as important in terms of the 
supply chain for semiconductors and clean energy technologies, and emphasizes the 
strengthening of cooperation between the Indo-Pacific countries and ASEAN and the OECD. In 
addition, China, the U.S., the U.K., Germany, and other countries where competition for scientific 
and technological human resources is intensifying internationally are taking measures such as 
easing visa and nationality requirements to attract excellent research personnel from the Global 
South. At the same time, many of the countries positioned in the Global South are promoting 
their own foreign policies to solve their own economic and social problems, and there are also 
moves among the Global South to strengthen bilateral or multi-country partnerships. For 
example, in January 2023, India held a summit and ministerial-level meeting titled “Voice of 
Global South Summit”
32
 to bring together the countries of the Global South, and said that the 
views expressed at the meeting would be reflected in the G20 discussions. In 2023, India held 
the G20 Presidency, and the African Union (AU) was invited to become a permanent member
33
. 
The “G20 New Delhi Summit Declaration” expressed support for stronger relations between the 
G20 and the AU, support for African industrialization, and support for the AU’s development 
goal “Agenda 2063”
34
. Also, at the G7 Puglia Summit in June 2024, representatives of Canada, 
the Republic of Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Kenya, 
Mozambique, Nigeria, South Africa, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the European 
Union adopted a joint statement on the initiative “Energy for Growth in Africa”
35
.
Against this backdrop, Japan has been taking concrete steps to strengthen its partnership with 
the Global South
36
. Japan has provided a high level of support to the Global South through ODA 
and contributions to international development finance institutions (Japan’s Official 
Development Assistance (ODA) in 2021 was the third largest among developed countries, 
31 United Nations, “The Group of 77 at Fifty,” https://www.un.org/en/chronicle/article/group-77-fifty
32
 Ministry of External Affairs, Go
vernment of India “1st Voice of Global South Summit 2023,” 
 
https://www.mea.gov.in/voice-of-global-summit.htm
33
 “
African Union appeals to G20 members for Modi’s support; may it come true next year?” 
 https://jp.r
euters.com/world/us/RWATIULBG5IUHCH4SIKWWHFXAA-2023-09-07/
34
 “
G20 summit agrees to permanent membership of African Union (AU)” 
 
https://www.jetro.go.jp/biznews/2023/09/8e0f4f9044916a5a.html
35
 M
inistry of Foreign Affairs, “G7 Puglia Summit” https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/ecm/ec/pageit_000001_00005.html
36
 P
rime Minister’s Office, “Conference on Promoting Strengthening Cooperation with Global South Countries” 
https://www.kantei.go.jp/jp/101_kishida/actions/202310/17globalsouth.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 19
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
following the United States and Germany
37
).The term “Global South” was included for the first 
time in the 2022 edition of the White Paper on Development Cooperation, which expressed the 
intention to strengthen emergency assistance, including food aid, to Global South countries in 
Asia, Africa, and the Middle East that are facing food insecurity and energy crises in the wake of 
the situation in Ukraine. The white Paper also stressed the need for Japan to support the Global 
South as a measure to maintain and strengthen a peaceful and stable international order
38
. In 
August 2025, Japan will host The Ninth Tokyo International Conference on African Development 
(TICAD 9) 
39
 in Yokohama.
This section discusses the partnerships with ASEAN, which has been increasing its presence in 
the Global South in recent years. Since 2021, the U.S., EU, and China have been strengthening 
their government-level partnerships with ASEAN and their financial support. These partnerships 
include enhanced collaboration in the areas of science and technology, and a series of plans 
have been announced to provide assistance for environmental issues, supply chain, defense, and 
development.
In addition, the United Kingdom has maintained a government-level partnership with ASEAN 
since leaving the EU, and in January 2024, announced the establishment of the International 
Science Partnerships Fund (ISPF), which will be funded by the ODA, and will support 
collaboration with global researchers and innovators on global environment, health, technology, 
and human resources for Southeast Asian countries. The Fund is funded by a consortium of 
leading research and innovation organizations in the UK, including UK Research and Innovation 
(UKRI) and UK Academies, and is intended to support collaboration with researchers and others 
in Southeast Asian countries from around the world. It has been announced that Malaysia will 
be the first recipient of this fund
40
.
The year 2023 marks the 50th anniversary of friendly and cooperative relations between Japan 
and ASEAN. Japan and ASEAN have built up their relationship over a long period of time and 
have made steady progress in specific cooperation projects in a wide range of areas such as the 
economy, security, researcher exchange, etc. In the STI field they have conducted joint research 
to solve social issues, human resource development utilizing Japanese technology and 
knowledge, as well as exchanges with Japanese youth in the field of science and technology
41
. 
37 Ministry of F oreign Affairs, “Japan’s Development Cooperation White Paper 2022 Introduction” 
https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/gaiko/oda/shiryo/hakusyo/22_hakusho/honbun/b0/hajimeni.html
38
 Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, “Japan’s Development Cooperation White Paper 2022 Assistance to the Global South, 
which will be greatly affected” 
 https://www.mofa.g
o.jp/mofaj/gaiko/oda/shiryo/hakusyo/22_hakusho/honbun/b1/s1_3.html
39
 Ministry
 of Foreign Affairs, “The 9th Tokyo International Conference on African Development(TICAD 9)” 
https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/af/af1/pagew_000001_00002.html
40
 GO
V.UK, “UK launches International Science Partnership Fund worth £218 million,” 
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-launches-international-science-partnership-fund-worth-218-million
41
 Ministry
 of Foreign Affairs, “The 50th Anniversary of ASEAN-Japan Friendship and Cooperation～People-to-
People Interaction～” https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/files/100596241.pdf
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN20
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Against this backdrop, the “Special Summit Meeting to Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of 
ASEAN-Japan Friendship and Cooperation” was held in Tokyo in December 2023. At the Summit, 
a joint vision statement, the “Actions for ‘Peace and Prosperity’ through ‘Co-Creation’ Based on 
Trust
42
”, was adopted to strengthen the mutually beneficial comprehensive strategic partnership 
between Japan and ASEAN. The Actions include a total of 130 specific cooperation items, 
including plans to further promote science and technology cooperation by strengthening 
cooperation in research and development and innovation, and to foster the exchange of human 
resources between ASEAN and Japan. In addition, the FY2023 supplementary budget provided 
for “ASEAN-Japan Cooperative Research Collaboration in Science, Technology and Innovation 
(approximately 14.6 billion yen)” to strengthen sustainable research collaboration with ASEAN 
countries through a wide range of initiatives building on the longstanding ASEAN-Japan 
international joint research and research human resource exchange.
Furthermore, in April 2024, MEXT, the ASEAN Secretariat, and JST organized the “Japan 
ASEAN High-level Roundtable on Science, Technology and Innovatione
43
” as an official side 
event of the ministerial-level meeting of the Committee on Science and Technology Policy 
(CSTP) of the OECD, which was attended by science, technology, and innovation (STI) policy 
officials from ASEAN member countries. STI policy leaders from Japan and ASEAN member 
countries, including science and technology ministers, science and technology advisors, and 
government officials, gathered to discuss ASEAN-Japan STI cooperation. The participants 
confirmed that Japan, ASEAN, and ASEAN member countries have been building important 
partnerships. They also welcomed the opportunity provided by the 50th anniversary of 
friendship and cooperation in 2023 to further deepen STI cooperation in the future.
2.5.2 Science and Technology Diplomacy Initiatives
Since the concept of science and technology diplomacy was first proposed by the United 
States and the United Kingdom in 2010, science and technology diplomacy has been promoted 
mainly by developed countries. In recent years, science and technology diplomacy efforts by the 
Global South have become more apparent, as evidenced by the G20 Science Advisory 
Roundtable held in 2023 under the leadership of India, which called for the “establishment of a 
global science advisory mechanism using science diplomacy as a tool” (See Chapter 3, 3.1). The 
International Network for Governmental Science Advice (INGSA) also held an international 
conference in Rwanda in May 2024, the first time an INGSA international conference has been 
held in the Global South, that was also attended by participants from Africa, and at which science 
and technology diplomacy was discussed (see Chapter 3, 3.3.1 for more details). In addition, the 
11th World Science Forum, held in November 2024, was relatively well attended by participants 
from Europe and Africa and also addressed science and technology diplomacy (detailed in 
42 Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “The 50th Anniversary of ASEAN-Japan Friendship and Cooperation/ Outcome of the 
Special Summit” https://www.mofa.go.jp/mofaj/files/100597146.pdf
43
 JST
, “ASEAN-Japan High-Level Roundtable on Science, Technology and Innovation Held” 
 
https://www.jst.go.jp/report/2024/240621.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 21
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Chapter 3, 3.3.5).
Asian trends include the efforts of the Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF) and the Thailand-led 
ASEAN+3 (Japan, China, and Korea) Pilot Science Diplomacy Workshop for Young Mid-career 
Researchers.
Initiatives of the Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF)
The Asia-Europe Foundation (ASEF) was established at the 1st Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) 
to promote exchanges between the two regions, and was launched on the occasion of the First 
ASEM Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in February 1997. With its secretariat in Singapore, it is 
operated by 21 Asian countries and one organization, and 30 European countries and one 
organization, all of which are ASEM member countries. Japan is also member. ASEF conducts a 
variety of activities, including personal, intellectual, and cultural exchanges, to promote mutual 
understanding between Asia and Europe. Beginning in 2024, the Asia-Europe Science and 
Technology Diplomacy Report was launched with the aim of identifying differences in national 
strategies and policy measures related to science and technology diplomacy among member 
countries and regions, and providing insights and recommendations to relevant organizations 
on areas for strengthening intra-regional and inter-regional cooperation. Country informants 
(country researchers) were publicly invited from about 40 countries and regions to participate in 
the preparation of the report, which was scheduled to be released in March 2025 or later. The 
JST Center for Research and Development Strategy (CRDS) Science and Technology Diplomacy 
Group participated from Japan. In November 2024, as a side event of the 11th World Science 
Forum, an interim report meeting was held to provide an overview from France, Belgium, 
Hungary, Vietnam, Thailand, and Japan. Although none of the countries that presented a topic 
this time has a national strategy dedicated to “science and technology diplomacy”, they did tend 
to emphasize science and technology diplomacy in their STI policies. France, Belgium, and 
Hungary emphasized that they will promote their own efforts in accordance with the “European 
Science Diplomacy Framework (tentative name)” currently being formulated by the EU 
Directorate-General for Research. Vietnam and Thailand have included science and technology 
diplomacy in their policy documents, indicating a growing momentum to promote specific 
initiatives in the future. As for Japan, SATRESP, ASPIRE, and NEXUS were introduced as 
examples of initiatives utilizing the Science and Technology Advisory System and in line with 
the Science and Technology Innovation Basic Plan. Discussions at the 3rd Symposium on 
Science and Technology Diplomacy were also introduced, and recommendations were made to 
move from policy to practice (Actionable Science and Technology Diplomacy).
The Pilot Science Diplomacy Workshop for Early-to-Mid Career Researchers in ASEAN Plus 
Three (Japan, China, and Korea)
This workshop was held in August 2024 in Bangkok, Thailand, hosted by the Thai Science 
Research and Innovation Organization (TSRI) and co-sponsored by the Third World Academy of 
Sciences (TWAS), the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), and the 
National Science Museum (NSM) of Thailand. Modeled on the AAAS-TWAS Summer Course on 
Science Diplomacy, which has been held annually by TWAS and AAAS in Trieste, Italy since 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN22
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
2014, the workshop aimed to foster the concept of science and technology diplomacy in the 
ASEAN region and to build a network of young and mid-career researchers and government 
officials. Pairs of researchers and administrative officials from nine ASEAN countries (excluding 
Singapore) and Japan participated. The keynote session featured a speech by the Japanese 
Ambassador to Thailand, as well as online participation by the Science and Technology Advisor 
to the U.S. Department of State and the International Director of AAAS. In addition, the TWAS 
Science Diplomacy Program Coordinator spoke on the basics of science diplomacy, and experts 
such as Zakri Abdul Hamid, former Science Advisor to the Government of Malaysia, presented 
on related topics. From Japan, the CRDS Science and Technology Diplomacy Group introduced 
the trends and directions of science diplomacy discussions in the world, including the 3rd 
Science and Technology Diplomacy Symposium, and noted the growing importance of research 
security. Group work and presentations were then conducted by the participants. It appears that 
consideration is being given to holding the next meeting, and it is hoped that the event will be 
held on an ongoing basis.
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 23
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Country/Region 
Initiatives and 
Noteworthy Trends
2

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
3 STI Issues Surrounding Science and 
Technology Diplomacy
3.1 Science and Technology Diplomacy and the Scientific Advisory Sys tem
The importance of scientific and technical advisors and scientific advice
44
 has received 
renewed attention. COVID-19 was truly a global pandemic in human history, but one of the few 
positive aspects was that in overcoming it, much of the public came to understand the 
importance of science, technology, and scientific advice. Furthermore, the rapid development of 
emerging technologies such as AI, quantum, and biotechnology, combined with changes in 
world affairs due to geopolitical tensions, are rapidly increasing the demand for scientific 
knowledge in important policy decisions.
Discussions on Japan’s science and technology advisory system began in light of how the 
science and technology advisory systems in the United Kingdom and the United States provided 
scientific advice to the Japanese government in the aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake 
and Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident in March 2011. At the time of the Great 
East Japan Earthquake, Sir John Beddington, then Chief Scientific Advisor to the British 
government, immediately convened an emergency group called SAGE (Scientific Advisory Group 
for Emergencies), which issued guidelines based on scientific evidence to embassy staff in Japan 
and the British public that concluded “there is no need to evacuate Tokyo”. A few days after the 
earthquake, when the U.S. Navy was advocating the evacuation of U.S. citizens from the Tokyo 
area and the State Department was opposing the evacuation from a diplomatic standpoint, John 
Holdren, then Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, advised the President not 
to evacuate based on simulations supported by the scientific community in the United States. 
This decision became the final decision of the U.S. government
45
. These actions led to a 
discussion on whether Japan should also have its own science and technology advisor to provide 
scientific advice to the government.
In September 2015, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs appointed Teruo Kishi (Professor Emeritus, 
University of Tokyo) as the first Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, based on the recommendations of the Advisory Panel on Science and Technology 
Diplomacy (chaired by Takashi Shiraishi, then President of National Graduate Institute for Policy 
Studies). In April 2020, Yoichiro Matsumoto (Professor Emeritus, University of Tokyo) became 
44 F or more information on scientific advice, see “Takeo Arimoto, Yasushi Sato, and Keiko Matsuo 2016, Scientific 
Advice: Science, Technology, and Policy Formation in the 21st Century,” University of Tokyo Press, and “Toward 
the Establishment of an Ecosystem of Scientific Advice in the Post-Pandemic Era: Challenges and Future 
Directions in Response to New Coronavirus Infections. Challenges and Future Directions in Responding to Viral 
Infections: https://www.jst.go.jp/crds/pdf/2022/RR/CRDS-FY2021-RR-10.pdf” etc.
45
 Natur
e.com, “Five years after Fukushima: scientific advice in Japan,” 
 
https://www.nature.com/articles/palcomms201625
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN24
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
the second Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In the meantime, 
Mitsunobu Kano (Professor, Okayama University) served as Deputy Science and Technology 
Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2019 to 2022, and was succeeded by Motoko 
Kotani (Professor, Tohoku University) in 2022. (The activities of the Science and Technology 
Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs are detailed in Chapter 2, 2.1.)
In September 2022, the Japanese government appointed Kazuhito Hashimoto (Professor 
Emeritus of the University of Tokyo and President of JST) to the position of Science and 
Technology Advisor to the Cabinet Secretariat, a position equivalent to that of the Presidential 
Science and Technology Advisor in the United States or the Chief Science Advisor to the 
Government in the UK. This appointment was made in response to the “Grand Design for New 
Capitalism and Action Plan (Cabinet Decision: June 7, 2022)
46
”, which included “the 
establishment of a Science and Technology Advisor at the Prime Minister’s Office to provide 
information and advice to the Prime Minister.” In May 2023, Mr. Shigeo Koyasu (President, 
Research Organization of Quantum Science and Technology) was appointed Science and 
Technology Advisor to the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and 
in March 2024, Mr. Hideo Ohno (then President, Tohoku University) was appointed as Special 
Advisor (Science and Technology) to METI. As of February 2025, four science and technology 
advisors to the government are active and collaborating with each other by holding liaison 
meetings, etc.
Cabinet Secretariat Science and Technology Advisor Hashimoto is engaged in a variety of 
activities aimed at gathering information and building a network that will contribute scientific 
advice to the Prime Minister. In March 2023, prior to the G7 Hiroshima Summit, the G7 Science 
and Technology Advisors Roundtable
47
 was held in Washington, D.C., for a frank discussion on 
the promotion of international brain circulation and the associated need for research integrity 
and security. In addition, the Scientific Advisory Roundtable 2023
48
 and the Scientific Advisory 
Roundtable 2024
49
 were held in Kyoto in September 2022 and October 2023, respectively, to 
exchange views on the expected roles and initiatives for scientific and technical advisors and 
advice. The Scientific Advisory Roundtable 2024 took advantage of the occasion of the 21st 
Annual Meeting of the International Forum on Science, Technology and the Future of Humanity 
(STS Forum) to hold a frank discussion among domestic and international science and 
technology advisors and equivalent experts attending the meeting on the role of scientific and 
technical advisors and scientific advice for ensuring research security. Furthermore, Advisor 
Hashimoto, together with Takahiro Ueyama, Full-time Member of the Council for Science, 
Technology and Innovation, and Shigeo Koyasu, Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister 
46 Cabinet Offic e, “Grand design and implementation plan for the new capitalism”
 https://www.cas.g
o.jp/jp/seisaku/atarashii_sihonsyugi/pdf/ap2022.pdf
47
 Cabinet Offic
e, “G7 Science and Technology Advisors Roundtable”
 https://www.cas.g
o.jp/jp/siryou/pdf/20230324_kanrisyoku.pdf
48
 JST
, “Science Advisor Roundtable 2023 to be held” https://www.jst.go.jp/report/2023/231121.html
49
 JST
, “Scientific Advice Roundtable 2024 to be held” https://www.jst.go.jp/report/2024/241108.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 25
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, jointly with the ASEAN Secretariat, 
organized the “ASEAN-Japan Science, Technology and Innovation High Level Roundtable
50
” as 
an official side event at the OECD Headquarters (Paris, France) in April 2024, taking advantage 
of the opportunity provided by the ministerial-level meeting of the Committee on Science and 
Technology Policy (CSTP) of the OECD to bring together science, technology, and innovation 
(STI) policy makers from ASEAN member countries.
Science and technology advisors are also becoming more active in the international 
community. In August 2024, the Chief Science Advisors of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States issued a joint statement on their shared commitment to 
using science and technology to address today’s challenges and improve collaboration across the 
scientific research systems within and between their countries
51
. One sign of the growing 
interest in scientific advice in emerging economies are the G20 activities. The G20 presidency in 
2023 was India. At the initiative of Ajay Kumar Sood, Chief Science Advisor to the Government 
of India, the G20 Chief Science Advisers Roundtable was held twice (March and August) and an 
outcome document
52
 was compiled that called for “the establishment of a global science 
advisory mechanism using science diplomacy as a tool”. This document was adopted as an 
annex to the G20 Summit in September 2023. In September 2024, UNESCO and the Government 
of India co-hosted the Chief Science Advisers Roundtable 2024 at UNESCO Paris Headquarters 
with the participation of national chief science advisers or their equivalent and international 
organizations. The discussion focused on “Promoting Open Science, Eliminating Knowledge 
Asymmetries, and Building Scientific Advisory Capacity Globally”
53
.
In the second Trump administration in the United States, President Trump nominated Michael 
Kratsios, an executive at AI startup Scale AI, as Director of the White House Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (OSTP) and Assistant to the President for Science and Technology (APST), 
who will also serve as science and technology advisor to the President. On January 23, President 
Trump also announced the establishment of the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and 
Technology (PCAST) under his administration, and nominated David Sacks, a former executive 
at online payments giant PayPal Inc., as its head. President Trump also created two new posts of 
senior policy advisor and counsel for AI at OSTP and appointed Sriram Krishnan, an Indian-
origin investor, and Lynne Parker, an AI researcher, respectively, for each post. Parker will also 
50 JST , “ASEAN-Japan High-Level Roundtable on Science, Technology and Innovation Held” 
 https://www.jst.g
o.jp/report/2024/240621.html
51
 British 
Government, “Joint Statement by the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United 
States: August 2024” 
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/joint-statement-between-the-uk-australia-canada-new-
zealandand-the-united-states-august-2024
52
 G
20 2023 INDIA, “G20- Chief Science Advisers Roundtable (G20-CSAR) Outcome Document & Chair’s Summary, ” 
https://www.g20.in/content/dam/gtwenty/gtwenty_new/document/G20_CSAR_Outcome_Document_and_
Chair_Summary_28A
ug.pdf
53 UNESC
O Digital Library “Chief Science Advisors Roundtable 2024 (CSAR-2024)” 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000391404
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN26
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
serve as Executive Director of PCAST. Considering that in the first Trump administration, the 
OSTP Director was appointed approximately two years after the start of the administration, and 
PCAST was launched two years and nine months later, the increased interest in science and 
technology in the second administration is evident.
3.2 Science and Technology Diplomacy and Research Security
3.2.1 The Changing Positions of Science and Technology and STI Policies in the 
Midst of the Changing Global Situation
In 1999, the Budapest Declaration
54
 was adopted at the World Science Forum (WSF) (see 
Chapter 3, 3.3.5), and “science for society” became a common understanding. In the 2000s, 
expectations for economic development through science, technology, and innovation (STI) 
increased, while the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were adopted at the UN Summit in 
2015, and momentum for solving global-scale issues through STI also accelerated. However, the 
role of STI is changing even further. In recent years, economic security challenges have emerged 
in the wake of COVID 19, which developed into an unprecedented pandemic, and growing 
supply chain risks due to heightened geopolitical tensions. In response, the United States, the 
United Kingdom, Germany, and the European Union are actively participating in a framework of 
like-minded countries and are revising their national security strategies to emphasize science 
and technology. Recent national and regional national security strategies and economic security 
policies (Figure 6) show the growing involvement of science and technology (especially 
emerging and critical technologies), as well as advocating for the “formation of an international 
order” that is free and open with a “multinational approach”. In other words, in order to develop 
and socially implement emerging technologies (AI, semiconductors, quantum, advanced 
telecommunications, biotechnology, clean energy, etc.) and secure supply chains, Japan will 
need to focus on establishing its technological and industrial superiority and working with allies 
that share its values, while also attempting to solve global-scale issues such as climate change. 
The strategy of simultaneously implementing these conflicting approaches can be described as 
a “dual-track approach”.
Figure 6
55
    National security str ategies and economic security policies of major 
countries and regions 
Date of Establishment Document Name Decision-making body
October 2022 US National Security Strategy Whitehouse
54 W orld Science Forum (1999). “‘DECLARATION ON SCIENCE AND THE USE OF SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE,’” n.d. 
https://2019.worldscienceforum.org/contents/declaration-of-the-1999-unesco-world-conference-
onscienc
e-110056.
55
 Figur
e 5 is included only in the Japanese version.
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 27
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Published 2021, revised March 
2011 UK Integration Review British Cabinet Office
June 2023 German National Security Strategy German Federal Government
June 2023 European Economic Security 
Strategy
European Commission (executive 
of the EU)
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
Given these circumstances, the report “STI Outlook 2023” published by the OECD in March 
2023 points out that “securitization” of STI policies is progressing. The term “securitization” here 
refers to the recognition of policy issues (climate change, food, energy, large-scale disasters, 
mineral resources, water, inter-technologies, emerging technologies, etc.) that were not fully 
considered as security issues in the past. The report also emphasizes the concepts of 
“Technology Sovereignty” and “Strategic Autonomy” as STI policy frameworks in major 
countries and regions (e.g., China, the EU, and the US). The report points out that three types of 
policy intervention tend to be implemented in science and technology
56
.
● Protection: Restricting technology flows and reducing dependency risks through export 
controls and other regulatory policies, supply chain diversification measures, etc.
● Promotion: improving domestic innovation capacity and performance through comprehensive 
innovation policies, mission-oriented innovation policies, national industrial strategies, etc.
● Projection: Expanding and deepening international STI collaboration through international 
technology partnerships, active participation in international standardization bodies, etc
57
.
Furthermore, the report states that these changes are creating a new environment for STI 
policy and emphasizes the need to transform the goals and instruments of STI policy. In 
particular, the report recommends the following points as important to strengthen the resilience 
function of STI and clarify the direction of STI policy and international cooperation
58
.
● Governments need to treat issues cross-ministerially and coordinate on an issue-by-issue 
basis.
● One-size-fits-all measures should be avoided and strategic competition should be examined 
and addressed on a case-by-case basis.
● There is a need for “strategic intelligence” such as horizon scanning, foresight, and technology 
foresight assessments to make well-informed decisions in a turbulent and uncertain 
56 O ECD, “Chapter 2 Science, technology and innovation policy in times of strategic competition,” Science, 
Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023, (pp.43-86)
 
https://www.oecd.org/sti/science-technology-innovation-outlook/
57
 The 
“European Economic Security Strategy” of the European Union also has a similar concept, but uses the term 
“partnering” instead of “projection”.
58
 O
ECD, “Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023,” 
 
https://www.oecd.org/sti/science-technology-innovation-outlook/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN28
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
environment.
● Like-minded governments should work together to avoid situations such as an inefficient 
“subsidy race” competition.
3.2.2 Overview of Efforts to Ensure Research Security in Major Countri es
As discussed in the previous section, while strategic international collaboration on science and 
technology has become increasingly important, the damage to the health of the research system 
and its negative impact on national security due to technology outflows and other consequences 
of the undue use of open research systems has become apparent since around 2018. This has 
affected cross-border scientific collaboration and the international flow of scientists, which until 
then had been taken for granted for the exploration of new knowledge. Maintaining the right 
balance between scientific openness and scientific protection is now a key global issue in the 
context of science and technology policy
59
. As of February 2025, there are more than 200 
research security-related initiatives from 27 countries listed in the OECD policy database
60
, 
compared to 17 from 12 countries in 2018. Below is an overview of the governments, policies, 
and initiatives of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, France, and Germany, based on 
their public documents.
United States
Government Policy:
In accordance with the 1985 National Security Decision Directive (NSDD-189) 
61
, all results of 
fundamental research conducted by government agencies, including the Department of Defense, 
are available to the public. In January 2021, President Trump (during his first administration) 
issued National Security Presidential Memorandum-33 (NSPM-33
62
). This required funding 
agencies to establish a “Research Security Program” for research institutions that receive federal 
research funding. About three and a half years after the Biden administration took over, the 
Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) issued guidelines in July 2024. In August 2022, 
the “CHIPS and Science Act”
63
 was enacted to further strengthen research security as well as to 
protect critical domestic technologies such as semiconductors and promote research and 
development of critical technologies. As of February 2025, following the inauguration of the 
second Trump administration in January 2025, there have been no new developments, but future 
changes in policy should be closely monitored.
Dialogue between government and academia:
In 2020, the National Academies established the “Science, Technology, and Security 
59 Mervis, Jeff. “SCIENCEINSIDER.” Science, February 16, 2024. 
https://www.science.org/content/article/why-white-house-taking-so-long-issue-new-research-security-rules.など
60
 O
ECD, ”EC-OECD STIP Compass.” https://stip.oecd.org/stip/research-security-portal
61
 https://irp.fas.or
g/offdocs/nsdd/nsdd-189.htm
62
 https://trump
whitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/presidential-memorandum-united-
statesgovernment-supported-research-development-national-security-policy/
63
 https://www.c
ongress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/4346
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 29
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Roundtable”
64
 under the National Defense Authorization Act to promote dialogue between key 
personnel from federal agencies, intelligence agencies, and national security agencies involved 
in science and technology, and universities, government research institutions, and industry.
Academia in Motion:
In 2019, the independent scientific advisory group JASON released a report on “Fundamental 
Research Security”
65
. The report notes that international collaboration is essential to the 
development of science in the United States, but that some foreign governments are using unfair 
means while enjoying the value of research collaboration. On the other hand, excessive 
regulation of basic research may hinder the development of science, advocating the need for a 
common understanding between government and academia. In 2024, the National Academies 
issued a report, “International Human Resource Development Program in a Changing Global 
Environment”
66
. The report stated that there are risks involved in accepting foreign nationals, 
but that risks should be mitigated and international collaboration with like-minded countries 
and the Global South should be promoted, and recommended 11 items to attract talent to 
national security and defense-related fields.
Specific measures:
Funding Agencies: In June 2024, the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced a new 
research security initiative (TRUST) in the funding adoption process involving primary 
assessment of sensitivity through keyword searches, in-depth investigation of possible high risk, 
and implementation of risk mitigation measures as necessary. The trial was scheduled to begin 
in the quantum field in FY2025. OSTP issued guidelines in July 2024, and research institutions 
(including universities) that receive $50 million or more in annual federal science and 
technology support are required to establish a research security program based on the OSTP 
guidelines. Such programs must include training in (1) cyber security, (2) international travel 
security, (3) research security, and (4) export control.
In support of ensuring research security, in July 2024, NSF announced the establishment of 
the “Safeguarding the Entire Community of the U.S. Research Ecosystem” (SECURE) under the 
CHIPS and Science Act with a five-year, $67 million (approximately 10 billion yen) 
67
 budget. 
The research community-led initiative will share and provide solutions (such as shared tools, 
best practices, training, analysis, and other information) to support decision-making in the 
context of malignant foreign threats.
United Kingdom
Government Policy:
In 2019, the National Protective Security Authority (NPSA, formerly CPNI) released the 
64 https://www.nationalacademies.or g/our-work/national-science-technology-and-security-roundtable
65
 https://www.nsf.g
ov/news/special_reports/jasonsecurity/JSR-19-2IFundamentalResearchSecurity_12062019FIN 
AL.pdf
66
 The National A
cademies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (The National Academies)
 
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/27787/international-talent-programs-in-the-changing-
globalen
vironment
67
 https://new.nsf.g
ov/news/nsf-backed-secure-center-will-support-research
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN30
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
“Trusted Research Guidance”
68
 on information disclosure and risk assessment of disclosed 
information. It is expected that individual universities will use this as a guideline and take 
measures in consideration of their own environment and other factors. In 2021, the National 
Security and Investment Act established an investment review system for 17 areas of specific 
sensitive technologies
69
, requiring more stringent due diligence for the 17 areas. In response, 
the Cabinet Office issued its “Guidance for Higher Education Institutions and Research 
Institutes”. (The 17 areas to be reviewed are: advanced materials, advanced robotics, AI, nuclear 
power, telecommunications, computer hardware, major government supply, cryptographic 
authentication, data infrastructure, national defense, energy, military and general-purpose 
products, quantum technology, satellite and space technology, emergency services supply, 
synthetic biology, and transportation)
Dialogue between government and academia:
In April 2024, then Deputy Prime Minister Oliver Dowden received Vice Chancellors from a 
group of 24 UK research universities (the Russell Group) and was briefed on security by the 
Director General of MI5 and the Chief Executive of the National Cyber Security Center (NCSC)
70
. 
He warned that sovereign states are targeting UK universities to achieve their own priorities, 
putting national security at risk. With regard to cutting-edge technology, the risks are 
particularly serious, he said. At the same time, Deputy Prime Minister Dowden also promised to 
maintain the openness and independence of the academic sector.
Academia in Motion:
In July 2024, the Russell Group released a position paper
71
 stating that UK universities have 
responded to threats by working closely with government ministries and security agencies, 
strengthening internal defenses with enhanced due diligence, staff training, and strong policies 
in line with guidance, but noted that a budget is needed to building on these responses and 
responding quickly to new threats.
Specific measures:
Funding Agencies: In 2021, UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) issued guidance
72
 stating 
that universities and research institutions receiving research funding are expected to have a 
system of due diligence in place during international collaborations. Based on this guidance, the 
EPSRC under the UKRI (which funds engineering research) has decided to conduct due 
diligence on research participants when supporting international collaborative research, with 
the aim of reducing research security risks as much as possible while not hindering opportunities 
for international research collaboration.
Support to ensure research security: In May 2021, the current Department for Science, 
Innovation and Technology (DSIT) established the Research Collaboration Advisory Team 
68 https://www.npsa.g ov.uk/trusted-research-academia
69
 https://www.g
ov.uk/government/collections/national-security-and-investment-act
70
 “
Government to launch new consultation to protect UK universities from security threats,” 26 April 2024. 
 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-to-launch-new-consultation-to-protect-uk-
univ
ersitiesfrom-security-threats
71
 https://russellgr
oup.ac.uk/policy/policy-documents/briefing-research-security-a-shared-responsibility/
72
 https://www.ukri.or
g/manage-your-award/good-research-resource-hub/trusted-research-and-innovation/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 31
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
(RCAT), an organization that advises universities and research institutions on international 
security risks related to international research collaboration.
Canada
Government Policy:
The “National Security Guidelines for International Research Cooperation”
73
 (2021) was 
released, outlining the nature of the risks and the direction of risk mitigation measures. The 
Guidelines provide a wealth of information on potential risks in international research 
collaboration, including a list of (1) sensitive research areas and (2) research partners of concern 
(designated research institutions), and a portal site “Safeguarding Your Research”
74
 has been 
launched. In January 2024, the Government of Canada issued a “Policy on Sensitive Technology 
Research and Concerned Affiliations,” which clearly states that researchers who are affiliated 
with or have a background with institutions that may pose a risk to national security, or who 
receive funding or in-kind support from such institutions, may not receive research grants from 
the Canadian government to promote highly sensitive technology research areas.
Dialogue between government and academia:
In 2018, a working group was established at a gathering of government agencies, funding 
agencies, and university officials
75
 to begin discussions on research security and promote related 
policies with the understanding of academia. In addition, the Science and Technology Advisor 
himself has sent out messages to raise the importance of research security.
Specific measures:
Funding Agencies: As a pilot phase of the implementation of the “National Security Guidelines 
for International Research Cooperation” (2021), risk assessment was piloted in 2021-2023 in 
certain open call programs of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC). 
When working with the private sector, applicants submit a risk assessment form, and the 
National Security Division provides additional assessment and advice as needed as a result of 
the risk assessment. If risks are identified, risk mitigation measures are developed. Science merit 
and risk assessment reviews are conducted separately
76
.
Federal support for ensuring research security: The Research Support Fund (approximately 
$25 million per year, established by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council 
(SSHRC), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), and the Canadian 
Institutes of Higher Education and others that receive research funding from the Canadian 
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)) supports efforts necessary to ensure security by providing 
a variety of tools, including building research security training courses, establishing a research 
73 https://scienc e.gc.ca/site/science/en/safeguarding-your-research/guidelines-and-tools-implement-
researchsecurity/national-security-guidelines-research-partnerships#2
74
 https://scienc
e.gc.ca/site/science/en/safeguarding-your-research/guidelines-and-tools-implement-
researchsecurity/sensitive-technology-research-and-affiliations-concern/policy-sensitive-technology-research-
andaffiliations-concern
75
 https://scienc
e.gc.ca/site/science/en/safeguarding-your-research/general-information-research-security/
aboutgovernment-canada-universities-working-group
76
 https://www.rsf-
fsr.gc.ca/home-accueil-eng.aspx
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN32
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
security center as a consultation center, presenting case studies, and introducing dual-use 
technology trends by the Ministry of Defense
77
.
France
Government Policy:
In 2012, the “Potential Protection Scientific and Technical” (PPST) system was put into 
operation with the aim of safeguarding technical protection from a security and economic 
perspective. Among the targeted technological fields*, the PPST protects technology, 
knowledge, and information that may lead to (1) economic benefits, (2) military weapons, (3) 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and (4) terrorism, and is positioned to 
complement the export control and foreign investment control systems already in place. 
Penalties under the Penal Code apply for violations. *Fields covered: biology, medicine, health 
sciences, chemistry, mathematics, physics, agriculture and ecology, earth, space, and space 
science, information and communication technology, and engineering. Institutions that deal 
with protected technology, knowledge, and information must establish restricted areas (ZRR), 
and physical and non-physical access is permitted only within those areas. Institutions 
(including universities) with restricted areas (ZRR) are assigned Security civil servants (FSD), 
who assist in the identification and assessment of risks at the institution. The FSDs are 
networked and work with the Security and Defense Officials (HFDS) located in each ministry 
and agency to implement the PPST.
Specific measures:
Ministry of Higher Education: A department has been set up to conduct risk assessments of 
research laboratories at research institutions, identify laboratories with high sensitivity 
(designated as restricted areas (ZRR)), and check whether the management of participants and 
information access is adequate.
The French National Research Agency (ANR): For the past two years, the ANR has been 
checking whether the candidate proposals for adoption include (1) overseas offices or (2) 
companies. If applicable, data is sent to the Ministry of Higher Education for a decision. 
The National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS): Ethics Officer (from the National 
Defense) has been appointed to serve as the point of contact with the Ministry. Each region and 
university also has personnel in charge of research security. Laboratories designated as 
confidential by the Ministry (including participants, management of research themes, etc.) are 
protected in cooperation with the Ministry. 
Support for ensuring research security: The security officer (FSD) of each institution/
university functions as a point of contact and a system is in place to consult with the responsible 
department of the Ministry of Higher Education.
Germany
Government Policy:
77 https://scienc e.gc.ca/site/science/en/safeguarding-your-research/guidelines-and-tools-implement-
researchsecurity/risk-assessment-review-process
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 33
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
In 2023, the federal government developed its first security strategy
78
 and China strategy. 
China has developed greatly economically and in terms of science and technology, and is too big 
to ignore, and while it is unrealistic to completely cut off collaboration, the key question is how 
to mitigate risk and collaborate with China. In March 2024, the Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research (BMBF) released a position paper on research security, recommending a policy of 
cooperation between BMBF and academia, security authorities, federal states, etc. under the 
principle of “as open as possible, as closed as necessary,” as well as a review of the adequacy of 
the civilian clause of universities (internal regulations that prohibit military research).
Academia in Motion:
In 2014, the German Association for the Promotion of Research (DFG) and Leopoldina 
(German Academy of Sciences) compiled guidelines for the handling of dual-use research, 
which were revised to include research security in 2022. The guideline states, “In principle, the 
researcher conducting the research and the research institution to which the researcher belongs 
should be aware of the risks and take responsibility for promoting the research.”
Specific measures:
Funding Agencies: In September 2023, the German Association for the Promotion of Research 
(DFG) developed and published “Recommendations for Addressing Risks in International 
Collaborations,” a set of guidelines to raise awareness among researchers about the benefits and 
risks of implementing international collaboration. In January 2024, the German Academic 
Exchange Service published its “Guidelines for Cooperation with China”. The guidelines state 
that cooperation with China itself, with its strongly developed scientific system, is important, 
and recommended three basic guidelines and specific recommendations for action: (1) be 
interest-oriented, (2) consider risks, and (3) cooperate in a manner appropriate to their 
capabilities (including the expansion of knowledge). It also established Kiwi, an organization to 
advise German universities on how to proceed with international cooperation (including risks).
3.2.3 Expected Role of Science and Technology Diplomacy
Approaches to ensuring research security differ with each country’s STI policy, systems, and 
historical background. However, in the international framework of like-minded countries, shared 
values and principles are being promoted to ensure that such differences do not impede 
international collaboration. The G7 Science and Technology Ministers’ Meeting (Bologna, July 
2024) stressed the “growing importance of promoting research security integrity in international 
cooperation” and noted that “the G7 is an important forum for discussing, promoting and 
disseminating common values and principles and best practices”. At the OECD-CSTP 
(Committee on Science and Technology Policy) ministerial meeting (Paris, April 2024), the 
ministerial declaration included strengthening shared values in international cooperation, such 
as research security and integrity. In May 2024, the EU Council of Ministers in charge of research 
adopted a “Recommendation on Strengthening Research Security” for Member States. The 
78 ht tps://www.nationalesicherheitsstrategie.de/%E5%9B%BD%E5%AE%B6%E5%AE%89%E5%85%A8%E4%BF%9D
%E9%9A%9C%E6%88%A6%E7%95%A5-JP.pdf
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN34
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
recommendations include consideration of academic freedom, adherence to the principle of “as 
open as possible, as closed as necessary” in cooperation with non-EU member states, non-
discrimination and respect for fundamental rights, strengthening cross-sectoral cooperation 
within governments, and establishing new support organizations.
In a new report published by The Royal Society and AAAS in February 2025, “Science 
diplomacy in an era of disruption” (see Chapter 1, 1.2), research security is identified as a new 
and challenging area of science and technology diplomacy. The report states, “While it is not yet 
clear how research security efforts will affect the process and outcomes of science diplomacy, 
which must balance the value of protection and international cooperation for national security 
purposes, research in this area is making progress.” Coordinating national rules for research 
security so as not to impede international collaboration in science and technology will be an 
important new role for science and technology diplomacy
79
. In addition, although discussions 
on research security are currently focused on advanced Western countries, it is necessary to 
expand the discussion to the Global South in the future, and science and technology diplomacy 
is expected to play a role in this regard as well.
79 Kana Asano and Tateo Arimoto, “Science Diplomacy — 15 Years On Special Issue,” October 17, 2024. 
https://www.sciencediplomacy.org/perspective/2024/research-security-for-actionable-science-diplomacy
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 35
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
STI Issues Surrounding 
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy
3

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
4 Science and Technology Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4.1 International Network for Governmental Science Advice (INGSA)
The International Network for Governmental Science Advice (INGSA) was established in 2014 
at the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU, now the International Council for 
Science (ICS)) in Auckland, New Zealand, in 2014. It is a global network of policy makers, 
practitioners, academics, researchers, and others participating on an individual basis to develop 
and share theoretical research and practical methods and processes on scientific advice and 
bridging science, policy, and society. In recent years, the Network has been building capacity in 
the science-policy interface in developing countries and accumulating a database of collected 
and analyzed examples of scientific advice in various countries during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
To further this, they are actively organizing international symposiums, workshops, etc
80
. INGSA 
was reorganized in 2021 from an affiliate of ICSU to an NGO corporation under New Zealand 
law, with the aim of achieving a more stable organization and operation. Currently, the President 
is from Canada and the Vice-Presidents from the United Kingdom, Ethiopia, and Chile. 
Membership is growing and currently stands at approximately 3,000 members
81
. Regional 
chapters have been established in Asia (Malaysia), Africa, and Latin America, and expansion to 
North America, Europe, and the Middle East is being considered. INGSA, in collaboration with 
ISC, FMSTAN, and others, is actively promoting the development of various methods of scientific 
advice, sharing of knowledge and experience, and training of young people in the relationship 
between science, politics, and society, both for common global benefit and for individual regions 
and national cultures, in order to respond to the new era of SDGs and pandemics.
INGSA has held an international conference every 2-3 years since the first one in Auckland. 
(Figure 7).
Figure 7   INGSA International Conference Achievements
Year held Venue Main theme
2014 Auckland Science Advice to Governments: A global conference for leading 
practitioners
2016 Brussels Science and Policy-Making: Towards a New Dialogue
2018 Tokyo Science Advice in a changing world
80 INGSA https://ingsa.or g/
81
 INGSA 
“INGSA Strategic Plan 2022-2025,” 
 
https://ingsa.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/INGSA-Strategic-Plan-2022-2025.pdf
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN36
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
2021 Montreal Build Back Wiser : Knowledge, Policy, and Publics in Dialogue
2024 Kigali THE TRANSFORMATION IMPERATIVE
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
In May 2024, the 5th INGSA International Conference was held in Kigali, Rwanda under the 
main theme “The Transformation Imperative: Expanded Evidence for Inclusive Policies in 
Diverse Contexts”. For the first time since the COVID-19 pandemic, the event was held in a face-
to-face format
82
. This was the first time the event was held in the Global South, and according to 
the organizers, 6,000 people (including online) from 65 countries attended. Throughout, equity, 
diversity, and inclusion in scientific advice were emphasized. President Rémi Quirion (Scientific 
Advisor to the Province of Quebec, Canada) emphasized the importance of scientific advice and 
science diplomacy to governments as we approach the 10th anniversary of the establishment of 
INGSA, and the importance of the participation of various sectors, not only at the national level 
but also at the international, regional, and city levels, as well as human resource development. 
Kristiann Allen, INGSA General Secretary, introduced the diverse activities of INGSA’s regional 
chapters. The Prime Minister of Rwanda and the Minister of Research and Education also gave 
speeches, stating that Rwanda aims to be a developed country by 2050, that it places great 
importance on investing in science, technology, and STEM education, that scientific advice is an 
important initiative for Rwanda, and that they welcome the INGSA conference. A keynote 
session and about 15 breakout sessions were held. The breakout session titled “Challenges of 
Science Diplomacy in a Divided World” featured Motoko Kotani, Deputy Chief Science and 
Technology Advisor to the Japanese Foreign Minister, Patricia Gruber, then Science and 
Technology Advisor to the US Secretary of State, and Marco Müller, Coordinator for Science 
Diplomacy and Multilateral Relations, European Commission, DG Research and Innovation. 
Officials from India, South Africa, China, and Brazil took to the stage and confirmed the 
importance of international collaboration using science and technology to solve global issues. In 
the session on “Institutional Development/Mapping - From Mechanisms to Ecosystems”, Dr. 
Yasushi Sato (Professor at Niigata University, CRDS Fellow) from Japan shared a case study on 
the SPI (Science Policy Interface). Tateo Arimoto (Counselor, JST; Visiting Professor, National 
Graduate Institute for Policy Studies) is a board member, and Kana Asano (JST and CRDS 
Fellow) served as a program committee member for the 2024 INGSA meeting.
At the November 2024 INGSA Board meeting, it was decided that the next INGSA meeting will 
be held in Malaysia in 2027.
82 INGSA, “INGSA2024: The Transformation Imperative Expanded Evidence for Inclusive Policies in Diverse 
Contexts,” https://ingsa.org/ingsa2024/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 37
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
Figure 8   Concepts and Topics of the 5th INGSA International Conference
Topic Topic Overview
Transformation
How should the principles and practices of scientific advice change as problem 
framing and scientific advice authority moves beyond technical diagnosis and 
solutions to individual policy problems to broader, more complex transformative 
approaches.
Expanded evidence
Scientific advice must help decision makers analyze and manage the complex 
issues facing societies across borders, and this requires expanding and applying 
evidence beyond traditional definitions and boundaries.
Inclusion
In order to (re)build and maintain trust in institutions and the social cohesion 
they engender, diverse audiences must be involved in the processes that affect 
them.
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
4.2 Foreign Ministries Science & Technology Advice Network (FMSTAN)
The Foreign Ministries Science and Technology Advice Network (FMSTAN) is a worldwide 
informal network of science and technology advisors appointed by the foreign ministers of their 
respective countries
83
. It was launched following an exchange of views on science and 
technology diplomacy held at the National Academy of Sciences in 2016, presided over by the 
Science and Technology Advisor to the U.S. Secretary of State. The four founding members are 
Vaughan Turekian, former Science and Technology Advisor to the U.S. Secretary of State; Peter 
Gluckman, former Chief Science Advisor to the Prime Minister of New Zealand; Teruo Kishi, 
former Science and Technology Advisor to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs; and Robin Grimes, 
former Chief Science Advisor to the British Foreign Office. FMSTAN is comprised of member 
countries’ principal science and technology advisors and science and technology advisors to 
their ministers of foreign affairs, as well as senior science and technology officials in their 
respective ministries of foreign affairs. In Japan, the Science and Technology Advisory System to 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Council for the Promotion of Science and Technology 
Diplomacy were established in 2015. Currently Yoichiro Matsumoto serves as the Science and 
Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Motoko Kotani is the Deputy Chief 
Science and Technology Advisor to the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In November 2023, Patricia 
Gruber, Science Advisor to the U.S. Secretary of State, assumed the FMSTAN chairmanship, and 
as of February 2025, with her resignation of the position of Science Advisor to the Secretary of 
State, Allison Schwier, Acting Science Advisor to the U.S. Secretary of State, is serving as chair of 
FMSTAN. In light of the increasing global importance of science and technology in diplomacy, 
information sharing and policy dialogue have focused on the following three areas. 
(1) 
 Sharing the scienc
e and technology diplomacy activities of each country
83 International Network for Government Science Advice, “Foreign Ministries Science & Technology Advice 
Network (FMSTAN),” https://ingsa.org/divisions/fmstan/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN38
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
(2) Sharing best practices and lessons learned in strengthening the science and technology 
advisory function
(3) 
 Str
engthening the science and technology advisory function in ministries of foreign affairs 
and raising awareness of the importance of science and technology throughout the 
ministries.
The FMSTAN meetings held to date are shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9   
 FMST
AN face-to-face meetings in recent years (information exchange 
also conducted online on an irregular basis)
Date held Venue
September 2017 Talloires, France (Tufts University European Center)
May 2018 Geneva, Switzerland (held consecutively with the United Nations Conference on 
Science, Technology and Development (CSTD/UNCTAD))
November 2018 Tokyo, Japan (held in conjunction with the International Network for Governmental 
Science Advice (INGSA) Conference)
February 2019 Muscat, Oman
November 2019 Vienna, Austria (in succession with WSF in Budapest)
March 2022 Cadarache, France
October 2022 Geneva, Switzerland (held in conjunction with the Annual Meeting of the Geneva 
Foundation for Scientific Diplomacy and Foresight (GESDA))
May 2024 Kigali, Rwanda
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
4.3 American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS)
The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), founded in 1848, is a 
private, non-profit organization and the largest academic organization in the world. It was born 
out of an attempt to organize scientists throughout the country at a time when the number of 
scientists in the United States was still small. It is said to be the first organization in the world to 
promote science and engineering. The purpose of its activities is to provide useful science-
related information to science, technology, and education professionals and various professional 
organizations. AAAS headquarters are located in Washington, D.C., with a staff of approximately 
200. The association has approximately 1.2 million members, and membership is open to 
anyone who pays a membership fee.
In addition to publishing the journal 
Science , one of the two major scientific journals, AAAS 
holds an annual meeting around February each year. The meeting features scientific sessions, 
workshops, and poster sessions on the latest scientific findings, as well as a diverse program of 
symposia, where scientists and the general public discuss science, technology, and policy. The 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 39
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
meeting also features events and professional development sessions to promote connections 
among the diverse communities of scientists, educators, policymakers, and journalists. The 2025 
Annual Meeting was held February 13-15 in Boston under the theme “Science Shaping 
Tomorrow”. In the chaos immediately following the inauguration of the second Trump 
administration, AAAS executives stressed the importance of strengthening the scientific 
enterprise from a long-term perspective in an era when the objectivity and truth of science are 
under threat. They strongly insisted that the scientific community must take proactive action in 
light of the current fragile state of the U.S. scientific ecosystem
84
.
In 2008, AAAS established the AAAS Center for Science Diplomacy to build bridges between 
the international community, local communities, and societies and nations through close 
interaction between science and diplomacy. The Center regularly holds trainings and workshops 
on science diplomacy and offers an introductory online course. In addition, the Center promotes 
the practice of science advice internationally, presenting the “AAAS Science Diplomacy Award” 
to science or foreign policy communities for their contribution to the role of science cooperation. 
Since January 2024, in collaboration with The Royal Society, the Center has been leading an 
effort to rethink the framework for science and technology diplomacy, and played a central role 
in the publication of a new report, “Science diplomacy in an era of disruption,” in February 2025. 
(The report is described in detail in Chapter 1, 1.1).
The “Science and Technology Policy Fellowship” program implemented by AAAS has a 50-year 
history. The program sends scientists and engineers (many of whom hold doctoral degrees) to 
one of the legislative, judicial, or administrative branches of government for one year in 
principle, to gain hands-on experience in the process of science and technology policy making. 
Currently, about 300 scientists and engineers are dispatched each year to federal agencies, 
Congress, and the offices of legislators for about a one-year term. The number of applicants 
usually exceeds 800 and the hiring rate is about 30%. Salaries and activity fees are covered by 
the host institution when the fellowship is to a federal agency, and by AAAS or an academic 
society (partner association) when the fellowship is to a congressional office. Many of the 
approximately 4,000 graduates are active in the field of science and technology policy. (After 
completing their fellowships, about 42% remain with federal agencies, about 24% return to 
academia, and the remaining 34% work for non-profit or for-profit organizations.) The 
fellowships have also influenced the formation of similar programs in the U.S. and abroad; for 
example, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), in partnership with the U.S. 
Agency for International Development (USAID), has offered the AAAS Science and Technology 
Policy Fellowship since 2014
85
.
84 AAAS, “AAAS Leaders: We Must Stay Focused Amid Turmoil” 
https://www.aaas.org/news/aaas-leaders-we-must-stay-focused-amid-turmoil
85
 AAAS, 
“Fellowship,” https://www.aaas.org/fellowships
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN40
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
4.4 Science and Technology in Society forum
The Science and Technology in Society forum (STS Forum) is an international conference on 
science and technology organized by the STS Forum, a non-profit organization. It is considered 
to be the world’s largest international conference of its kind, focusing on issues related to 
science, technology, and society that are common to the world. Former Minister of Finance and 
former Minister of Science and Technology Policy Koji Omi conceived the idea in 2002 to create 
a science and technology version of the Davos Forum, and the annual meeting has been held at 
the Kyoto International Conference Center since 2004. The STS Forum was established in 2006 
as a non-profit organization. The STS Forum Annual Meeting takes place every year on the first 
Sunday through Tuesday of October and is attended by approximately 1,500 world-class 
scientists, policy makers, and business executives from 120 countries, regions, and international 
organizations
86
.
The 21st Annual Meeting was held in October 2024, bringing together nearly 1,500 leaders 
from more than 80 countries, regions, and international organizations
87
. The opening session, 
“The World in 2024 -- What do we need from S&T?” was chaired by STS Forum President 
Komiyama and featured a video message from Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba. STS Forum 
President Komiyama emphasized the traditional STS Forum theme of “Lights and Shadows” of 
science and technology, with a particular emphasis on AI and explained that there would be four 
keynote sessions on AI, including themes such as “AI and Medicine,” “AI and Education,” and 
“Ethics and Regulation of AI,” as well as the timely creation and reading of discussion summaries 
by AI, in collaboration with the University of Tokyo. The conference declared its commitment to 
providing a forum for fair and open discussion by making full use of cutting-edge AI technology. 
Noting that while generative AI is bringing revolutionary changes to society, risks of false 
information and privacy are emerging, Prime Minister Ishiba said Japan will lead the “Hiroshima 
AI Process” and share a vision of “safe, secure, and reliable AI” at the G7. He also noted that the 
increasing power consumption of data centers is a challenge and that Japan should work 
together with industry, government, and academia on production and research of advanced 
semiconductors and human resource development, as well as formulate national strategies for 
nuclear fusion and quantum technology to achieve a carbon-neutral society. Furthermore, with 
the growing importance of international science and technology cooperation and science and 
technology diplomacy, Ishiba advocated accelerating international human resource exchange 
(international brain circulation) while ensuring research security. He also took note of the 
Osaka-Kansai Expo to be held in 2025 under the theme of “Design Future Society for Our Lives”. 
A breakout session on “Science Diplomacy” was held, chaired by Sudip Parikh, CEO of AAAS 
(American Association for the Advancement of Science), with Takao Someya (Professor, 
86 The Scienc e and Technology in Society forum, https://www.stsforum.org/
87
 STS f
orum, “Executive Summary of the STS forum 2024 – 21th Annual Meeting,” 
 
https://www.stsforum.org/file/2024/11/STS2024_Summary.pdf
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 41
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
University of Tokyo) as the Japanese speaker. After identifying factors hindering international 
cooperation in science and pointing out the importance of human resource development for the 
younger generation, discussion went on to the influence of politics on science and technology 
diplomacy, gaps in science data, and the importance of cooperation between diplomats and 
scientists. Also identified was the need to promote international mobility, education and 
financing, and collaboration with industry. Other sector-specific meetings, such as the Meeting 
of Heads of Research Institutions, the Meeting of Heads of Funding Institutions, and the 
Meeting of University Presidents, as well as various related meetings and top-level talks were 
held in conjunction with the STS Forum annual meeting, reaffirming the forum’s importance as 
an effective platform for science and technology diplomacy. It is expected that various 
stakeholders will take advantage of this valuable opportunity in the future. In addition, the 14th 
Meeting of Heads of Funding Agencies in 2024 was held under the theme of “Promotion of 
Science and Technology Diplomacy”
88
, and involved discussions of the roles and challenges of 
funding agencies.
4.5 World Scientific Congress(WSF)
In 1999, the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and 
the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU, now ISC) jointly organized the World 
Conference on Science, which resulted in the “Universal Declaration on Science and the Use of 
Scientific Knowledge” (Budapest Declaration). Four visions were presented as the 
responsibilities of science and technology in the 21st century and their contract with society: 
“Science for Knowledge; Knowledge for Progress,” “Science for Peace,” “Science for 
Development,” and “Science in Society and for Society”. This was the outcome of a week of 
discussions among 2,000 representatives of the science and technology community from 
industry, academia, and civil society from around the world who gathered in Budapest, the 
capital of Hungary. Based on deep reflection on how in the 20th century, science and technology 
played a part in wars, caused pollution, and had a major negative impact on society, a shift was 
declared from the perspective of a monolithic view of the history of progress and methods, 
which assumes that society will naturally progress if “science for knowledge” is promoted. This 
was a major paradigm shift in the values, ideas, and methods of modern science and technology 
established over the centuries since the Age of Enlightenment. 
The World Science Forum (WSF) has been held since 2003 under the joint sponsorship of the 
Hungarian Academy, UNESCO, ICSU, and the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science (AAAS) to discuss how to implement the Budapest Declaration and share concrete 
examples. The WSF brings together about 500 people from academic institutions and funding 
agencies, as well as researchers, and policy makers from around the world every two years to 
88 JST , “The Funding Agency Presidents’ Meeting” https://www.jst.go.jp/inter/others/symposium/fapm/fapm.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN42
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
deepen discussions
89
.
Since the 6th conference in 2013, the conference has been held alternately in Budapest and in 
developing countries in response to the rapid increase in global-scale issues such as climate 
change, biodiversity, and other sustainability-related issues, and the worsening impact on 
developing countries (Figure 10).
Figure 10   History of the “Budapest Declaration” and WSF
Year 
held Venue Main theme
Predecessor 1999 Budapest
(Hungary)
Declaration on Science and the Use of Scientific Knowledge
(The so-called “Budapest Declaration.”)
1st 2003 Budapest
(Hungary) Knowledge and Society
2nd 2005 Budapest
(Hungary) Knowledge, Ethics and Responsibility
3rd 2007 Budapest
(Hungary) Investing in Knowledge: Investing in the Future
4th 2009 Budapest
(Hungary) Knowledge and Future
5th 2011 Budapest
(Hungary) The Changing Landscape of Science – Challenges and Opportunities
6th 2013 Rio de Janeiro
(Brazil) Science for Sustainable Global Development
7th 2015 Budapest
(Hungary) The Enabling Power of Science
8th 2017 Dead Sea
(Jordan) Science for Peace
9th 2019 Budapest
(Hungary) Science, Ethics and Responsibility
10th 2022 Cape Town
(South Africa) Science for Social Justice
11th 2024 Budapest
(Hungary) The science and policy interface at the time of global transformations
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources
The 11th Forum was held in Budapest, Hungary in November 2024 under the theme “The 
science and policy interface at the time of global transformations”
90
. More than 1,100 
participants from 122 countries discussed global trends shaping the future of science and the 
89 WSF , “History of World Science Forum,” 
https://worldscienceforum.org/contents/history-of-world-science-forum-110010
90
 Scienc
e Council of Japan, “World Science Forum 2024 1st steering Committee Meeting” 
 
https://www.scj.go.jp/ja/int/haken/230911.html
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 43
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
interaction between science, society, and policymaking, and at the end adopted the “Declaration 
of the 11th World Science Forum: The science and policy interface at a time of global 
transformations” (see Column 4). At the forum, in addition to the traditional discussions of trust 
in science and the policy interface of science, the keyword “science diplomacy” emerged and was 
included in the declaration. Although no session on science diplomacy per se was held at the 
plenary session, there were many discussions, especially in Europe, at the side events. During 
the closing session, it was announced that the next 12th Forum will be held in Indonesia.
Column 4
11th World Science Forum (2024) Declaration: The 
interface between science and policy in a time of 
global transformation (Summary)
* Declaration published on the website, summarized and excerpted by 
CRDS
(Preamble Summary)
● The world faces a rapidly changing and uncertain future. Despite 
tremendous advances in science and technology, climate change and 
most of the Sustainable Development Goals are being inadequately 
addressed, conflict is increasing, and inequality is widening. There is an 
urgent need to increase scientific understanding and promote evidence-
based, science-based, long-term thinking and decision-making.
● Efficient, reliable, and creative science-policy interfaces are especially 
important at this time of global transformation.
● Recognizes the evolving role of science diplomacy in linking science 
and policy to solve challenges and to promote science for peace.
● Recognizes the challenges of evidence-based policymaking, but notes 
the growing risks posed by disinformation and other practices that 
undermine important trust in science. Regrets that distrust and outright 
denial of science is embedded in some political and social agendas. 
Need to confront these risks and remove potential obstacles.
● Acknowledges the universality of science, but recognizes that its impact 
will be limited unless the benefits of its advances and applications are 
shared equitably.
(Declaration Excerpts)
● Calls upon governments at all stages of development to ensure that 
knowledge production and translation is supported as an important 
factor in the development and well-being of the nation. Academic and 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN44
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
scientific freedom must be realized and maintained, science must be 
kept as open as possible, and science and scientific researchers must be 
protected. We call on the scientific community to redouble its efforts 
to ensure the generation of reliable knowledge and practical solutions, 
and to eliminate harmful scientific practices in both knowledge 
generation and reporting.
● Urge the scientific community to better inform both civil society and 
decision makers about the power of science to disseminate information 
and its limitations. These activities should be recognized as an 
important aspect of the scientific community’s mission.
● Should further integrate efforts to use and protect science within the 
multilateral system and through its components, working with the 
global scientific community through formal organizations, including 
those related to science diplomacy, among others.
● Urge governments, organizations, and companies to ensure that 
scientific developments and new and emerging technologies are 
subject to ethical standards.
4.6 Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator(GESDA)
The Geneva Science and Diplomacy Anticipator (GESDA) is a Geneva-based foundation 
established in 2019 for science and technology diplomacy initiatives with the support of the 
Swiss government and others
91
. Its vision is to “Use the future to build the present” by bringing 
together different communities to jointly anticipate scientific and technological advances and 
develop comprehensive, global solutions for a sustainable future based on those advances. 
Initially set for a pilot period through 2023, it was decided in March 2022 to continue activities 
through 2033, with funding and other support from the Swiss government
92
.
The three main activities are: holding an annual meeting (Summit), identifying and evaluating 
scientific and technological advances expected in the next 5, 10, and 25 years through the 
preparation of the Science Breakthrough Radar report, and activities based on the report’s 
suggestions. A distinctive feature of the Summit is the deep commitment of international 
organizations (the United Nations and related agencies). It was also announced that GESDA 
91 GESD A https://gesda.global/
92
 GESD
A, “Science diplomacy: Federal Council continues to support GESDA Foundation after successful pilot 
phase,” 
 
https://gesda.global/science-diplomacy-federal-council-continues-to-support-gesda-foundation-aftersuccessful- 
pilot-phase/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 45
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
plans to showcase future science and technology and its impact on society through an exhibition 
in the Swiss Pavilion at the 2025 World Expo in Osaka (Osaka-Kansai Expo)
93
.
93 GESD A “Step into the Future with GESDA at the World Expo 2025, Osaka, Japan” 
https://gesda.global/step-into-the-future-with-gesda-at-the-world-expo-2025-osaka-japan/
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN46
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Science and Technology 
Diplomacy in the 
International Framework
4

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
Conclusion ~Future Challenges and Prospects~
The Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) established the Office for Research on 
International Trends in Science and Technology in September 2022 and the Science and 
Technology Diplomacy Group in the Center for Research and Development Strategy (CRDS) in 
April 2023 to strengthen the international strategic systems for STI policy. This report 
summarizes the latest global trends in STI policy from the perspective of science and technology 
diplomacy, based on the experience and analysis of this group in planning and participating in 
related international activities with the cooperation of relevant departments. The report 
concludes with some future issues and prospects.
Formation of the concept and framework of science and technology diplomacy
The interrelationship between science and technology and diplomacy has a tortuous history 
of light and shadow over the centuries as modern science and technology developed. In the 21st 
century this relationship has been conceptualized as “science and technology diplomacy”. An 
international workshop co-sponsored by The Royal Society and the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science (AAAS) in 2010 and attended by 15 countries agreed on a basic 
framework of objectives and methods for science and technology diplomacy. There are three 
types of diplomacy: diplomacy for science, science for diplomacy, and science in diplomacy. 
Since then, based on this, there have been diverse activities of science and technology 
diplomacy, from a strategic layer involving the formation of international networks of heads of 
state, ministerial-level science and technology advisors, and academia in each country, to a 
practical layer of concrete joint activities among the UN SDGs, research funding agencies, 
universities, and individual researchers.
Need for change in the framework of science and technology diplomacy
However, after 2020, the political, economic, technological, security, and geopolitical global 
environment have been drastically changing due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s invasion 
of Ukraine, the intensifying struggle for hegemony between the United States and China, the 
development and competition of emerging technologies such as AI, and their increasing social 
impact. These factors have made it imperative to reexamine the 2010 framework for science and 
technology diplomacy. The objectives, scope, and people and organizations involved have been 
expanded and diversified, and are currently in the process of being redesigned. As already 
described in detail in the main text, some of the challenges and prospects for the future are as 
noted below.
1. Diversification and expansion of the objectives and scope of science and technology 
diplomacy
● Global-regional-national-local and outer-space perceived as spatial levels.
● International joint research in basic sciences.
● International joint projects in science and technology that address difficult global issues 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 47
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Conclusion 
~Future Challenges and 
Prospects~

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
such as climate change.
● Joint projects to achieve value such as enhancing competitiveness and security in each 
country’s national interest or in a limited number of countries (e.g., like-minded countries) 
or regions.
Science and technology diplomacy is entering a difficult period in which it is necessary to be 
strategic and selective in response to the objectives and the values it aims to achieve.
2. Diversification and expansion of actors and organizations involved in science and technology 
diplomacy: competition and collaboration, increased presence of the private sector
The organizations, groups, and individuals listed below are in dynamic motion, competing and 
cooperating with each other according to their various objectives. We live in an era that demands 
constant monitoring of trends and active participation.
● Politics, government, funding agencies and organizations, universities, businesses, NGOs, 
international organizations, etc. 
● G7, G20, OECD, UNESCO, International Science Council (ISC), World Science Forum (WSF), 
International Network for Governmental Science Advice (INGSA)
3. 2025 will be a landmark year in the history of science and technology diplomacy
The year 2025 will be an important year for Japan, as shown below, with a series of 
international conferences and reports to be held and published to discuss the challenges and 
prospects of science and technology diplomacy (Figure 11). It is necessary to demonstrate 
Japan’s contribution and presence in these conferences and reports, and it is in the national 
interest to do so. The CRDS Science and Technology Diplomacy Group was deeply involved in 
the discussions preceding the February 2025 publication of the AAAS and The Royal Society of 
London report, “Science Diplomacy in an Era of Disruption” (detailed in Chapter 1 of this text). 
This report reorganized the three frameworks of 15 years ago into two frameworks (Science 
impacting diplomacy and Diplomacy impacting science) with more emphasis on practice. It is 
expected to be a useful practical guide for researchers, practitioners, entrepreneurs, and their 
groups who are bridging the two areas of science and national interest, which are inherently very 
distant from each other, through international activities. Furthermore, a major international 
conference on science and technology diplomacy is scheduled to be held in Asia from 2026 to 
2027, and Japan is expected to make a positive contribution in the inner circle by setting the 
agenda. The World Science Forum (WSF) (Indonesia) and the International Science Council 
(ISC, Beijing) will be held in 2026, and the International Network for Governmental Science 
Advice (INGSA) will be held in Malaysia in 2027.
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN48
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Conclusion 
~Future Challenges and 
Prospects~

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
Figure 11    Discussion f orum related to science and technology diplomacy after 
February 2025
Date Contents
February 2025
AAAS Annual Meeting (Boston, USA)
AAAS and The Royal Society Announce New Science and Technology Diplomacy 
Framework
March 2025 UNESCO Ministerial Scientific Diplomacy Meeting (Paris, France)
May 2025 UN STI for SDGs: STI forum (New York, USA)
May 2025 Global Head of Funding Agency (GRC) Annual Meeting (Riyadh, Saudi Arabia)
Spring-Summer 2025 G7 Summit and related meetings (Canada)
Summer - Fall 2025 OECD STI Outlook 2025 to be announced
October 2025 STS Forum and related meetings (Kyoto, Japan)
November 2025 Geneva Foundation for Scientific Diplomacy and Foresight (GESDA) Annual Meeting 
(Switzerland)
2025 G20 Summit (also to host 3rd Scientific Advisory Roundtable) (South Africa)
December 2025 2nd European Science Diplomacy Conference and European Science Diplomacy 
Framework to be announced (in Copenhagen, Denmark)
2026 12th World Science Forum (WSF) (Indonesia)
2026 International Science Council (ISC) General Assembly (Beijing, China)
2027 International Network for Governmental Science Advice (INGSA) International 
Conference Malaysia
Prepared by CRDS based on various sources and information from related parties.
Secure and develop human resources for science and technology diplomacy
The UN, ISC, INGSA, and the European Commission have advocated that the promotion of 
new human resources for scientists and engineers in the 21st century should emphasize the 
development of designers, scientific advisors, and communicators who synthesize knowledge 
and create value, in addition to traditional scientists who create knowledge and produce papers. 
This is directly applicable to the image of human resources who will be responsible for science 
and technology diplomacy in the new era.
As we enter an era of dynamic and diverse changes in the currents of science and technology 
diplomacy, people and organizations engaged in this field in the severe international arena are 
required to analyze and act while constantly considering the values and norms of behavior and 
the 5W1H (who, what, for what, when, where, and how).
Science and Technology Diplomacy and Japan’s Challenges and Prospects
For Japan, it is essential to maintain and improve its level of science and technology, to be a 
leader in emerging technologies such as AI, semiconductors, quantum, and communication 
technologies, as well as in international cooperation and brain circulation. It is imperative that 
Japan work to enhance competitiveness, secure energy, food, and markets, and to strengthen 
supply chains, as well as to expand science and technology diplomacy activities and 
international networks at various levels and help formulate a strategic selective response for 
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN 49
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Conclusion 
~Future Challenges and 
Prospects~

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
each country and region. Under the current situation of severe global division, the Global North, 
Global South, and Asia have high expectations for Japan. These expectations will not last long if 
we do not make efforts now. Strategic efforts for science and technology diplomacy must be 
made in unison by the government, industry, academia, and citizens. Securing and fostering 
excellent human resources and establishing viable career paths are also major issues that need 
to be addressed.
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_EN50
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and Technology Agency 
RESEARCH REPORT　　New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology Diplomacy (2025)
Conclusion 
~Future Challenges and 
Prospects~

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
Contributors
Supervisor, Tateo ARIMOTO, Principal Fellow, Science Diplomacy Group, CRDS, JST 
Advisor, Office for International Science and Technology Policy and Information 
Study, JST
Member, 
 Kana ASANO, Fellow/ Group Leader, Science Diplomacy Group, CRDS, JST 
Director, Office for International Science and Technology Policy and Information 
Study, JST
New Trends in Science and Technology Innovation 
Policy from the Perspective of Science and Technology 
Diplomacy (2025)
CRDS-FY2024-RR-14_ENRESEARCH REPORT
May 2026
ISBN 978-4-86829-073-5
Center for Research and Development Strategy, Japan Science and T echnology Agency
10F K’s Gobancho Bldg., 7, Gobancho Chiy oda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076
Phone +81-3-5214-7481
E-mail crds@jst.go.jp
https://www.jst.go.jp/crds/en
This publication is protected by copyright law and international treaties.
No part of this publication may be copied or reproduced in any form or by any means without permission of JST, except to the extent 
permitted by applicable law.
Any quotations must be appropriately acknowledged.
If you wish to copy, reproduce, display or otherwise use this publication, please contact crds@jst.go.jp.
Please note that all web references in this report were last verified on the date indicated in each link or one month prior to the 
publication of the Japanese version of this report.
CRDS is not responsible for any changes in content thereafter.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
ISBN 978-4-86829-073-5
FOR THE FUTURE OF
SCIENCE AND
SOCIETY
https://www.jst.go.jp/crds/en
May 2026 JSTCRDS
