
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
MARCH 2018
A REPORT OF THE 
CSIS TECHNOLOGY 
POLICY PROGRAM
AUTHORS
William A. Carter 
Emma Kinnucan 
Josh Elliot
CONTRIBUTORS
William Crumpler 
Kirsten Lloyd

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
MARCH 2018
A National Machine 
Intelligence Strategy 
for the United States
AUTHORS
William A. Carter 
Emma Kinnucan 
Josh Elliot
CONTRIBUTORS
William Crumpler 
Kirsten Lloyd
A Report of the 
CSIS TECHNOLOGY POLICY PROGRAM

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
II
About CSIS
For over 50 years, the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) has 
worked to develop solutions to the world’s greatest policy challenges. Today, CSIS 
scholars are providing strategic insights and bipartisan policy solutions to help de-
cisionmakers chart a course toward a better world.
CSIS is a nonprofit organization headquartered in Washington, D.C. The Center’s 220 
full-time staff and large network of affiliated scholars conduct research and analysis 
and develop policy initiatives that look into the future and anticipate change.
Founded at the height of the Cold War by David M. Abshire and Admiral Arleigh 
Burke, CSIS was dedicated to finding ways to sustain American prominence and 
prosperity as a force for good in the world. Since 1962, CSIS has become one of 
the world’s preeminent international institutions focused on defense and security; 
regional stability; and transnational challenges ranging from energy and climate 
to global health and economic integration.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in Novem -
ber 2015. Former U.S. deputy secretary of defense John J. Hamre has served as the 
Center’s president and chief executive officer since 2000.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed here-
in should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
Acknowledgments
This report is coauthored and made possible by the generous support of Booz Al -
len Hamilton Inc. Booz Allen is a global firm of 24,225 exceptional people driven to 
excel, do right, and realize positive change on behalf of their clients. For more than 
100 years, Booz Allen has brought bold thinking to clients spanning defense to 
health and international development. The firm’s core capabilities are in consult -
ing, analytics, digital solutions, engineering, and cyber. Booz Allen is also a leading 
developer and implementer of machine intelligence (MI) technologies.
© 2018 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies 
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
202-887-0200 | www.csis.org

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
IIIContents
IV Executive Summary
VI SECTION I 
 Introduction
 4 SECTION II 
 The State of Machine Intelligence
10 SECTION III 
 Impact on the Economy, Society, and National Security
18 STRATEGIES 
 Creating a National Machine Intelligence Strategy
20 A. INVES T IN THE CONTINUING RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF MI TECHNOLOGY .
24 B. DEVEL OP A WORKFORCE FOR THE MI AGE.
30 C. CREA TE A FLEXIBLE AND OPEN DATA ECOSYSTEM IN WHICH MI CAN THRIVE.
34 D. CREA TE THOUGHTFUL PUBLIC POLICY TO SPUR MI ADOPTION AND REDUCE BARRIERS. 
38 E. DEVEL OP PROACTIVE STRATEGIES TO MANAGE MI’S RISKS. 
42 F . LEAD IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF MI TECHNOLOGY AND MI GOVERNANCE AROUND 
 THE WORLD THROUGH S TRATEGIC MI PARTNERSHIPS. 
46 Conclusion

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
IV
Executive 
Summary 
The United States is at the precipice of a defining moment in history. 
Over the past five years, progress in machine intelligence (MI) has great-
ly accelerated. From the defeat of Go champion Lee Sedol by Deep -
Mind’s AlphaGo program to the first deployments of fully autonomous 
vehicles on public roads, recent events are challenging us to reevaluate 
what may soon be possible for computerized systems. MI systems have 
already begun to quietly pervade a growing share of businesses, gov -
ernments, and individual lives around the world, and we are only just 
beginning to grasp the impacts that this technological revolution will 
have on our economy, our society, and our national security.
The United States’ current economic and technical lead in MI uniquely 
positions us to ensure the technology’s impact will be broadly beneficial, 
for Americans and the world. Other countries have already established 
national strategies to capture the benefits of MI and catch up with the 
United States. Capturing this opportunity requires we invest in remain-
ing at the leading edge of MI’s development, and plan for the broader 
changes it implies. A national strategy for MI will provide the United 
States a platform for creating the policies and investments that ensure 
MI’s progress is consistent with American goals, norms, and values.
This strategy should have two overarching goals. The first is to promote 
the safe and responsible development of MI technology by funding 
long-term R&D where the private sector is not incentivized to invest, de-
veloping a workforce for the MI age, creating dynamic commercial mar-
kets for MI technologies to capture the innovation of the private sector, 
and proactively managing the risks and disruptions that MI will bring. 
The second goal is to maintain U.S. leadership in MI by reinforcing our 
innovation base and establishing strategic partnerships to leverage the 
comparative advantages of our allies and lead the development of glob-
al MI governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
V
A. INVEST IN THE CONTINUING RESEARCH 
AND DEVELOPMENT OF MI TECHNOLOGY . 
Though the United States benefits from strong private- 
sector investment in MI R&D, companies alone cannot carry 
the burden of keeping the United States at the forefront of 
MI innovation. The government has a unique role to play 
in funding research into defense-specific innovations, sys-
tems of MI ethics and control, and high-risk, high-reward 
long-term research with uncertain commercial returns. The 
federal government must not waver in its commitment to 
advancing these essential domains, and must ensure that 
our national security community is able to keep up in the 
development and deployment of MI-enabled systems.
 
B. DEVELOP A WORKFORCE FOR THE MI AGE. 
We must adapt to shifting economic circumstances to 
prepare our workforce for the jobs of the future. This will 
require a renewed emphasis on computer science educa-
tion and technical skills to build and maintain MI systems, 
as well as basic digital literacy and the liberal arts as the 
economy faces a growing demand for adaptable workers 
with soft skills capable of complementing the operations of 
MI systems. It will also be essential for policymakers to help 
workers displaced by automation to develop new skills by 
expanding retraining and continuing education initiatives 
and strengthening the social safety net. We must also en-
sure that our country is able to attract and retain the 
best talent from around the world.
 
C. CREATE A FLEXIBLE AND OPEN DATA 
ECOSYSTEM IN WHICH MI CAN THRIVE.
An essential component for the development of MI systems 
is access to large amounts of high-quality training data. By 
expanding government open data initiatives, working with 
the private sector to support private-private sharing in ways 
that protect privacy, and supporting the development and 
deployment of new standards to improve data quality, the 
government can help MI developers access the data they 
need to create new and more powerful MI applications.
 
D. CREATE THOUGHTFUL PUBLIC POLICY TO 
SPUR MI ADOPTION AND REDUCE BARRIERS. 
Many U.S. enterprises are held back from capturing the full 
benefits of MI due to uncertainty over legal and regulatory 
requirements and a lack of supporting IT infrastructure. To 
help grow the market for U.S. MI developers and improve 
productivity throughout the economy, policymakers 
should consult with industry partners to identify ways to 
remove legal and regulatory uncertainty, and devise ways 
of supporting IT modernization within the private sector. 
E. DEVELOP PROACTIVE STRATEGIES 
TO MANAGE MI’S RISKS. 
While the apocalyptic warnings voiced by some in the 
tech community are overblown, MI systems will raise 
new challenges in the areas of privacy, algorithmic bias, 
system safety and control. The U.S. government can help 
confront these risks by leading in the development of 
safety, ethics, and control standards for MI, and working 
with the private sector to develop methods of testing and 
certification for MI systems. In addition, policymakers 
must establish clear expectations for MI developers in the 
event of accidents in order to reduce regulatory uncer-
tainty and manage public anxiety.
F. LEAD THE DEVELOPMENT OF MI 
TECHNOLOGY AND MI GOVERNANCE 
AROUND THE WORLD THROUGH 
STRATEGIC MI PARTNERSHIPS. 
By developing strategic MI partnerships, the United States 
can leverage the comparative advantages of our allies and 
help shape global technical and governance standards 
around the development and use of MI. A United States 
with a clear national strategy for MI should play a central 
role in the development of MI technology and MI policy 
around the world, and that will require strong partnerships 
with our allies.
 IT will take time to craft and implement all of 
the elements of a national MI policy, but 
we must act now to establish a cohesive national 
MI strategy. As a first step, the president should 
designate an MI lead at the White House to coordi-
nate the development and implementation of a 
strategy and ensure that this is a priority across 
the federal government. This person should prior-
itize reviewing and implementing the 2016 AI R&D 
Strategy recommended by the National Science 
and Technology Council. Federal agencies and 
regulators should also initiate consultations with 
the private sector and MI experts in academia to 
ensure that our approach is flexible enough to 
adapt over time and appropriate to the technolo -
gy. These discussions will take time, but will help 
to guide the efforts of policymakers and ensure 
that MI governance develops in partnership with 
industry, not in opposition to it.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
VI
Engingeer 
working on 
machine in 
factory.
INTRODUCTION 
SECTION I

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
1
The Promise 
and Peril 
of Machine 
Intelligence
MI refers to machines’ ability to perform 
tasks that would normally require hu -
man intelligence. Computer scientists 
and mathematicians develop MI sys -
tems by imparting the ability to find 
patterns in large data sets to computers 
(“machine learning”). Although the un -
derlying techniques used to create MI 
have existed since the 1960s, improve -
ments in computing power, availabil -
ity of data, and machine learning have 
spurred an MI renaissance over the past 
five years, generating the first applica-
tions of MI viable outside academic labs. 
MI’s advance has been rapid. Machines 
can already support or replace human 
tasks and decisionmaking, making us 
more incisive, productive, and free 
from rote work. In the future, MI will 
scale further, pairing human-like rea-
soning with growing volumes of data 
from sensors embedded in devices, 
vehicles, robotics, and infrastructure. 
With increasing ubiquity, MI will gath -
er, interpret, and act on data from the 
physical world with minimal human 
intervention. We will allow machines to 
make many decisions because they are 
faster at and more capable of interpret-
ing a world quantified by massive vol -
umes of data. 
These changes are remarkable in both 
their promise and their danger. 
 INTELLIGENT machines’ effi-
ciency and scale 
will help us address some of the world’s 
most urgent problems. With reams of 
data from x-rays and MRIs, cancer re -
searchers are teaching MI to detect the 
earliest signs of disease in patients. Ag-
ricultural companies are using millions 
of photos of plants to teach autono -
mous drones what healthy plants look 
like, improving farming practices and 
increasing crop yields. Energy experts 
are using data from building sensors 
and roads to create machines that can 
silently monitor and improve our infra-
structure’s electricity economy. Across 
sectors, new applications of MI that will 
meaningfully improve human life are 
reported almost every day.
INTRODUCTION

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
2
But MI’s impending ubiquity also car -
ries risks. When MI makes mistakes, 
produces unintended consequences, 
or is used nefariously, it will do so on a 
grand scale. MI systems’ efficiency will 
leave little time for human interven -
tion; its complexity will make it difficult 
to understand and remediate failures 
after the fact. Ill-advised applications of 
MI and technical mistakes have already 
disrupted financial markets, eroded 
public trust, and threatened our nation-
al security (see previous page). Even 
with advanced planning, problems with 
the technology cannot be fully avoided. 
In the next decade, we will likely see MI 
eliminate certain jobs, manipulate our 
personal information, limit our insight 
into how organizations make decisions, 
and reduce equity in parts of society. If 
not properly controlled, the technology 
holds the potential to exacerbate exist-
ing economic polarization, disenfran -
chisement, and social fragmentation.
How policymakers prepare for MI’s im-
pact today will determine whether the 
technology’s benefits ultimately out -
weigh its risks. The United States’ allies 
and competitors recognize this, and are 
vying to shape the norms and values that 
dictate MI’s use. China announced its 
national artificial intelligence (AI) strat-
egy in the summer of 2017, highlighting 
how it could apply the technology to 
track people on closed-circuit cameras, 
censor the internet, and predict crimes. 
In the fall of 2017, Russian president 
Vladimir Putin emphasized the strategic 
importance of MI in a speech to Russian 
schoolchildren. Canada, France, and the 
United Kingdom have each announced 
national-level strategies for enhancing 
their positions in the technology’s devel-
opment and ensuring its use preserves 
their norms around privacy, equity, and 
transparency.
 TO manage the social, geopoliti-
cal, and economic outcomes 
of MI for Americans and the world, the 
United States must also create a vision 
and strategy for the future of intelligent 
machines. We must invest in the re -
search and development (R&D) of MI 
and the establishment of a technologi -
cal ecosystem in which MI can thrive. We 
must renew our commitment to educa-
tion and to the development of a work-
force that possesses not only the techni-
cal skills to build intelligent machines, 
but the creativity and ingenuity to apply 
them to unique problems. We must take 
the lead in driving the development of 
national and international standards 
and policies for governing and manag-
ing risk and unintended consequences. 
Our action now will dictate MI’s impact 
on the world for decades to come. 
 
“Artificial intelligence 
is the future not only 
of Russia but of all 
of mankind.”
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN, 
SEPTEMBER 2017

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
3
Financial Markets
Unexpected interactions between superfast 
trading algorithms have been implicated in 
multiple instances of erratic activity in global 
stock markets of the past five years, including May 
6, 2010 “Flash Crash, ” which say the U.S. stock 
market plunge 998.5 points (roughly 9%, or USD $1 
trillion in market value) in minutes.
Left: Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock 
Exchange before the closing bell May 6, 2010.
photo by mario tama/getty images
https://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2010/marketevents-
report.pdf
Public Trust
Both applications of MI and the mechanisms by 
which it is created have disrupted the public’s 
confidence in institutions. In 2017, the U.K. ’s 
National Health Service (NHS) and Google’s MI 
unit, DeepMind, were censured by the British 
Information Commission (ICO) for inappropriately 
using 1.6 million patients’ records to train MI 
algorithms for a health application, spurring 
outcry among patient advocates.
Left: Royal Free hospital in north London said it would 
change how it handles data in future after ICO’s findings.
photo by ben stanstall/afp/getty images
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-40483202
National Security
Political twitter bots have been used in attempts to 
influence the outcome of elections around the world 
across the past five years, including in Turkey, Mexico, 
India, and the United States. Few of these influence 
campaigns have harnessed rapidly advancing 
machine learning or MI technologies, but there is 
concern that they soon will, making it more difficult 
to distinguish real accounts from sophisticated MI 
systems that learn from and mimic human behavior.
Left: A committee hearing on ‘Russia Investigative Task 
Force: Special Media Companies’ held on Nov. 1, 2017.
photo by alex wong/getty images
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.05143.pdf

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
4
Alan Turing, 
a British 
mathematician, 
logician and 
cryptographer. 
SECTION II
THE 
STATE 
OF 
MACHINE 
INTELLIGENCE

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
5A Brief 
History 
of MI 
The study of MI dates to at least 1950 , 
when famed British computer scientist 
Alan Turing considered the question 
“Can machines think?” in his paper 
Computing Machinery and Intelligence . 
A few years later, in 1956, Dartmouth 
University hosted the first academic 
conference on MI, signaling its start as 
a formal area of research. Since then, 
researchers in universities, government 
agencies, and technology companies 
have worked to realize real-world appli-
cations of MI. Several problems, howev-
er, consistently impeded the technolo -
gy’s progress. 
MI relies on a technique called machine 
learning, in which algorithms parse large 
data sets to identify and learn from pat-
terns. Until recently, the available body 
of digital data from which machines 
could learn was limited. Even in those 
instances in which data were available, 
computer processors ran too slowly to 
make most MI applications feasible. It 
could take days or even weeks for a com-
puter to churn through the data needed 
to learn a single MI task.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
SECTION
II
6
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
MI Today
Since 2010, a proliferation of data from 
connected devices and improvements 
in computing chips have created the cir-
cumstances MI needed to thrive. These 
developments allowed for the introduc-
tion of a new machine learning tech -
nique, deep learning, which has been 
integral to MI’s increasing ubiquity. Deep 
learning algorithms are generally more 
accurate and precise than other forms of 
machine learning, suiting them to com-
mercial use. 
With the necessary puzzle pieces in 
place, MI has sprung from relative ob -
scurity onto the international stage. The 
number of MI papers published annually 
has increased more than nine-fold since 
1996. In the last few years alone, MI has 
met or exceeded human capability in a 
range of narrow tasks, including object 
detection and speech recognition. 
MI’s ascendance is not limited to ac -
ademia. Investors have poured more 
than $5 billion into start-ups develop -
ing commercial MI applications over 
the past five years. Microsoft’s head 
of research, Peter Lee, compared the 
cost of hiring a top MI expert to that 
of signing an NFL quarterback. Amer -
ican companies acquired more than 
50 early-stage MI companies between 
2012 and 2017, many of which had 
not yet earned any revenue, the focus 
resting instead on gaining access to MI 
ideas and talent. By 2021, MI software, 
hardware, and services are expected to 
command nearly $58 billion across the 
global economy. 
 AMID the feverish excitement 
that has come to surround 
MI, there have been many exaggerated 
claims about its capabilities. It is impor-
tant to recognize that, while transform-
ative, machines’ form of intelligence is 
The 
Complementary 
Nature of Human 
and Machine 
Intelligence
 Derives from ob-
servation, evolution, 
culture, and more
 Operates well in 
novel, chaotic, and 
unpredictable envi-
ronments
 Attuned to per-
form work which 
requires judgment, 
creativity, empathy, 
interaction, and mul-
ti-domain expertise
 Transferable and 
generizable across 
multiple domains
 Derives from data 
and algorithms
 Operates well 
in predictable envi-
ronments richly 
documented in 
historical data
 Attuned to perform 
work which requires 
precision and effi-
ciency surrounding a 
narrow task
 Restricted to the 
narrow problem 
space it was created 
to address (i.e., an 
algorithm created to 
translate language 
cannot also identify 
objects in images)
HUMAN 
INTELLIGENCE
MACHINE 
INTELLIGENCE

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
7
der work machines can’t perform. With 
the aid of automated systems to review 
luggage scans for suspicious objects, 
Transportation Safety Authority (TSA) 
agents, for example, may spend less 
time staring at x-ray screens and focus 
more time on interacting with passen -
gers and assessing possible threats. 
The second category of pattern-match -
ing work MI can perform is the real-time 
analysis of massive volumes of data, 
which is impossible for humans today. 
For example, Amazon uses MI to mon -
itor and analyze many thousands of 
competitors’ online storefronts in real 
time, allowing them to dynamically 
change product prices in response to 
market conditions. Cyber security com-
panies like Cylance monitor organiza -
tions’ network activity to identify and 
preempt threats as they develop. MI’s 
ability to perform this new category of 
work will enable the delivery of new 
kinds of products and services that 
make people and organizations more 
efficient, dynamic, and productive. 
much different from—and much more 
rudimentary than—that of humans. MI 
will radically transform society, but it 
will do so by complementing, not re -
placing us.
What MI Can Do
Today’s MI systems are exceptional -
ly good at pattern recognition, which 
suits them to two categories of work. 
The first category of work comprises 
rote and repeatable tasks. MI’s ability 
to automate pattern-matching tasks, 
like recognizing objects in images and 
transcribing speech, will eliminate 
many tedious aspects of our jobs. 
MI-enabled transcription, for example, 
can help doctors save time recording 
patients’ medical files. Machine preci-
sion at these forms of repetitive work 
complements human capabilities. Un-
like humans, machines do not become 
fatigued, bored, or distracted when 
performing dull tasks. When we dele -
gate such work to machines, we can 
devote more attention to the higher-or-
“MI will radically 
transform society, 
but it will do so by 
complementing, 
not replacing us.”

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
SECTION
II
8
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
of the category into its narrow “input- 
response” paradigm. 
MI systems are also limited by their re -
liance on massive volumes of training 
data. While a human child could be 
taught to recognize the meaning of a 
stop sign given a few examples, a ma -
chine might require thousands of pho -
tos to achieve the same feat. As a result, 
MI is not well-suited to tasks for which 
there is little historical data.
 FINALLY , it is worth emphasiz -
ing that MI systems 
are not sentient: they lack self- 
awareness, motivations, and inten -
tions. They cannot explain their actions 
or mistakes. They are entirely reliant 
upon the algorithms we program into 
them and the data we feed them. Fears 
that robots will come to resent and 
overtake humans are unwarranted. 
Without very substantial, nonlinear ad-
vancements in the technology, the MI 
of science fiction will remain fictional. 
What MI 
Cannot Do (Yet)
While MI’s accomplishments are im-
pressive, these advances should not 
inspire fears about sentient robots sup-
planting humans.
Individual MI algorithms generally per -
form a single function. An MI algorithm 
designed to identify a roadside object, 
like a stop sign, could not also identify an 
open space in a parking lot. MI systems 
comprise a series of these algorithms, 
each working in relative isolation. As a 
result, machines are not able to piece 
together context in the way humans can.
Take, for example, the IBM Watson 
computer’s 2011 performance in a 
game of Jeopardy. The MI system dom-
inated the competition against two 
human Jeopardy champions until the 
final Jeopardy question: “Its largest air-
port is named for a World War II hero; 
its second largest, for a World War II 
battle. ” Watson guessed the answer to 
be Toronto, Canada. Unfortunately, the 
category was “U.S. Cities. ” The system 
got the answer wrong because it was 
unable to integrate the broader context 
IBM’s 
Watson 
competing 
in a 
game of 
Jeopardy.
photo by 
vincentlte

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
9
“Tasks for [MI] 
systems are often framed 
in narrow contexts. . . . 
While machines may exhibit 
stellar performance on a 
certain task, performance 
may degrade dramatically 
if the task is modified even 
slightly. For example, a 
human who can read Chinese 
characters would likely 
understand Chinese speech, 
know something about 
Chinese culture and even 
make good recommendations 
at Chinese restaurants. In 
contrast, very different AI 
systems would be needed 
for each of these tasks.”

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
10
An experimental 
Ford Fusion 
self-driving 
delivery car is 
displayed at CES in 
Las Vegas, Nevada, 
Jan. 12, 2018.
photo by 
david mcnew/afp/
getty images
SECTION III
IMPACT 
ON 
THE 
ECONOMY, 
SOCIETY, 
AND 
NATIONAL 
SECURITY

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
11
MI Will 
Transform 
the Economy 
in Two Waves
The first wave of economic impact from 
MI is already occurring and will expand 
rapidly in the next 5 to 10 years as or -
ganizations invest heavily to develop 
or buy applications of the technology. 
Companies around the world are pour-
ing money into MI R&D amid growing 
competition to be first-to-market with 
MI products and services. The technol -
ogy sector, including giants like Google 
and Baidu, spent close to $30 billion 
on creating and deploying MI in 2016 
alone. Other industries are investing 
heavily, as well. Toyota and Ford each 
spent over $1 billion to develop au -
tonomous vehicles in 2017.
, Last year, 
global revenues from the sale of early 
MI products and services reached over 
$12.5 billion, and venture capital and 
private equity investment in the tech -
nology surpassed $6 billion. Nvidia, 
which dominates global market share 
for the computer chips that power MI, 
saw its stock performance increase by 
over 700 percent from 2014 to 2017. 
The next wave of economic impact 
will occur as organizations move from 
developing MI and selling narrow, MI- 
enabled consumer products (e.g., Am -
azon’s Alexa and autonomous drones) 
to implementing MI as an enterprise 
system. Today, less than one-quarter 
of companies have adopted MI, and 
most organizations that are using it 
are doing so in narrow-use cases with-
in IT departments, like in cyber securi -
ty. Widespread MI adoption will have 
a transformative impact that parallels 
the adoption of the public internet, 
which went from relatively narrow use 
in the early 1990s to dictating much of 
global business operations by the first 
decade of the twenty-first century. 
 THERE is debate among econo -
mists about the nature 
of the impact this wider-spread MI 
adoption will have on economic 
growth and jobs. 
11

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
SECTION
III
12
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
Optimists argue a virtuous cycle will 
emerge in which MI makes organiza-
tions more productive by automating 
work, which will in turn reduce the cost 
of goods and ser -
vices, increase 
real income, and 
enhance people’s 
average standard 
of living. Some 
have posited that 
this economic 
boost could in-
crease global GDP 
by as much as 14 
percent ($15.7 
trillion) by 2030. 
They argue that 
those individuals 
whose jobs are 
automated will 
find new jobs in 
new categories 
of work that do 
not yet exist, and 
that the tech-
nology will not 
increase total un-
employment. The 
average worker 
in 2015, for ex -
ample, could en-
joy the same annual income level as a 
worker in 1915, while working just one-
third of the year. As jobs in agriculture 
and manufacturing were destroyed by 
technology in 1930s, the service sector 
exploded, growing by nearly 600 per -
cent in the last 80 years. 
Pessimists take a dimmer view, argu -
ing that MI could upend the economy 
by sewing widespread unemployment. 
A widely shared 2013 report from Ox -
ford economists suggested 47 percent 
of American jobs could be automated 
through MI and related technologies in 
"The nature of 
these changes, 
positive or 
negative, will 
depend in large 
part on the 
actions taken 
by policymakers 
and governments 
today."

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
13
the next 20 years. Experts in this camp 
believe MI is fundamentally different 
from previous technological break -
throughs in the speed and scale with 
which it will affect jobs. They argue so -
ciety’s most vulnerable workers, who 
perform low-wage, repetitive jobs, will 
be hit hardest, putting millions out of 
work while enriching a small set of cap-
ital owners. They point out that even as 
technological marvels have abound -
ed, real wages for most workers have 
barely increased since the mid-1960s, 
and annual U.S. productivity growth 
decreased from 3 percent between the 
end of World War II and 1973 to half that 
level today. 
The most extreme scenarios envi -
sioned by both the optimists and the 
pessimists are unlikely to come to pass, 
but we can expect MI to significantly 
change work, jobs, and the economy. 
The nature of these changes, positive 
or negative, will depend in large part on 
actions taken by policymakers and gov-
ernments today. Investment in new ed-
ucation and training programs and ex -
panded support programs for workers 
in transition, for example, could limit 
exposure to MI-driven unemployment. 
The expansion of multidisciplinary de -
gree programs in computer science and 
the social sciences at public universities 
could spur informed students to start 
new companies and create new job op-
portunities. Proactive policy solutions 
can reduce the risk of MI’s painful dis -
ruptions as MI is implemented across 
the economy. 
MI Will Transform 
Our Lives in Positive 
Ways, but Also 
Comes with Risks 
MI’s impact will extend beyond the 
economy, making possible advances 
that will transform our everyday lives. 
For consumers, MI promises greater 
choice and more convenient and per -
sonalized goods and services. Today, 
these benefits manifest as recommen-
dations in our Netflix queues or Am-
azon shopping carts, but in the future 
more meaningful applications will be -
come common. 
One application of MI that could have 
far-reaching consequences for our qual-
ity of life is enhancements to the health 
care we receive. Doctors and researchers 
are developing MI systems that could im-
prove the detection of disease, find new 
drug treatments, and create personal -
ized therapies to match patients’ unique 
symptoms and genetic attributes. These 
benefits could extend to mental health 
care as well. Psychologists are using MI 
virtual therapists to help troops discuss 
their post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) when they are too uncomforta -
ble to do so with people. Facebook has 
launched an MI system to detect suicidal 
posts from users before they’re report -
ed. Doctors are using natural language 
processing (NLP) MI to detect patterns 
of speech indicative of depression in pa-
tients. 
MI could also provide new solutions to 
global challenges like climate change. 
For example, shared fleets of autono -
mous vehicles could reduce the number 
of cars on the road, limiting congestion 
and air pollution and creating the op -
portunity to turn parking lots into green 
spaces. Scientists are experimenting

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
SECTION
III
14
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
with using MI to detect and monitor in -
vasive species in our oceans, protecting 
fisheries and tourism areas relied on by 
local economies. Energy experts are de-
veloping MI systems to enable efficient 
smart grid technology, reducing energy 
consumption and limiting the accelera-
tion of climate change. Companies like 
Microsoft are making massive invest -
ments in MI to help people around the 
world monitor, model, and manage the 
Earth’s natural systems, decreasing the 
damaging impacts of natural disasters, 
which cost $306 billion in 2017. 
These are just a few of the many ways 
MI will improve our daily lives. Academ-
ics, researchers, and corporations are 
finding ways to use MI to improve cyber 
security, financial services, education, 
transportation, infrastructure, manu-
facturing, and many other fields. But we 
Pilot models of 
the Uber self-
driving car is 
displayed at the 
Uber Advanced 
Technologies 
Center on Sep. 13, 
2016 in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
photo by 
angelo 
merendino/afp/
getty iImages

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
15
must acknowledge that the benefits MI 
offers us are accompanied by tradeoffs.
First, MI’s reliance on data creates chal-
lenges around privacy and equity. Amid 
the rush to create MI applications, organ-
izations could use our personal informa-
tion in ways that surprise and upset us. 
Google’s DeepMind MI unit and the U.K. ’s 
National Health System (NHS), for ex -
ample, were recently cited for using the 
sensitive health records of more than 1.6 
million patients without notifying the pa-
tients affected. MI’s reliance on data will 
also affect citizens’ rights to equitable 
treatment. Many MI systems rely on data 
produced by humans—data that reflects 
our biases and errors in judgment. When 
biased data is used to train machines, 
these biases can reach massive scale. 
Experts worry, for example, about the 
increasing use of MI to make hiring deci-
sions could replicate and scale patterns 
of discriminatory hiring. 
 SECOND, MI systems will com-
plicate our ability to 
assign responsibility for decisions and 
to receive transparency into how deci -
sions are made. Who, for example, will 
be responsible when an autonomous 
vehicle crashes? Should responsibility 
fall with the original equipment manu -
facturer, software maker, or the passen-
ger who failed to push a software up -
date? When assigning accountability to 
a machine or its user, it will often be dif-
ficult or even impossible to determine 
how the MI arrived at a decision. MI sys-
tems are complex, sometimes opaque 
even to their creators. In domains rang-
ing from medical diagnostics to loan 
risk scoring, this lack of transparency 
will create significant safety and legal 
risks as failures become inexplicable 
and encoded biases become calcified 
within audit-resistant models.
Third, MI’s impact on our work will spur 
existential questions. For millennia, 
human beings have largely defined our 
value and purpose based on our labor 
and our unique ability to reason and 
solve problems. All modern economies 
are organized around the principle of 
maximizing the productivity of human 
beings and distributing the benefits of 
human-driven production. While cur -
rent MI technology is limited and brit -
tle, it is already eroding some forms of 
work, and as the technology evolves 
to tackle more complex and dynamic 
problems, it could challenge how we 
relate to our jobs and organize society.
Finally, as with all technological devel -
opments, some will use MI for nefari -
ous purposes. Automation is already 
being employed in cyber-attacks, 
helping hackers attack large numbers 
of targets quickly and cheaply. MI 
systems can also create near-perfect 
counterfeits of audio and video, which 
could exacerbate growing public dis -
trust in news media and information 
shared by organization. 
MI’s effect on privacy, equity, account -
ability, transparency, and public trust 
will spur significant concern and de -
bate in the public and private spheres 
in the coming decade. People will look 
to their elected officials for leadership 
and guidance in managing the effects 
of MI on their lives at work and at home.

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
SECTION
III
16
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
Swarm of 
security 
drones with 
surveillance 
camera.
MI Will Redefine 
the Balance of 
Both Economic 
and Military Power 
Around the World
MI is creating a new era of strategic 
technological competition that, like the 
space race for the previous generation, 
will define the balance of global power 
for decades. Policymakers around the 
world are taking notice. In September 
2017, Russian president Vladimir Putin 
said, “Whoever becomes the leader in 
[MI] will become the ruler of the world. ” 
China’s New Generation of Artificial In -
telligence Development Plan, released 
in 2017, echoes this view, saying, “Ma -
chine intelligence [is] the strategic tech-
nology that will lead in the future. ” 
Nations’ ability to produce and lever -
age MI technologies will define their 
economic competitiveness. Going for -
ward, the global distribution of wealth, 
income, and soft power will be increas-
ingly determined by nations’ ability to 
develop innovative MI applications and 
leverage those applications across their 
economies. In the United States, the tech 
sector directly accounts for 7.5 percent

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
17
of GDP and provides over 7 million jobs, 
and is a key driver of growth and com -
petitiveness across virtually every other 
sector. In sectors as diverse as manufac-
turing, health care, energy, retail, and 
advertising and media, deployment of 
MI technologies holds enormous prom-
ise for driving new growth.
Eight of the top 10 tech companies in 
the world are U.S. based, which allows 
the United States to exercise dispropor-
tionate power in cyberspace. U.S. com-
panies reach virtually every consumer 
in the world, helping us to spread our 
values around the world. Global supply 
chains enabled by technology and MI 
have driven global economic integra-
tion. Information and communication 
technology (ICT) infrastructure and 
digital inclusion are also key compo -
nents of our efforts to build influence 
and support development and human 
rights in the developing world.
MI also has significant implications for 
hard power. Across the world, from 
the Chinese People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA) to the U.S. Department of Defense 
(DOD), there is growing recognition that 
the next generation of military tech -
nologies will be driven by MI. The na -
ture of conflict is shifting from today’s 
“informatized warfare” to “intelligen-
tized warfare” or “algorithmic warfare. ” 
Drone swarms, autonomous supply 
convoys, and remote medical care tech-
nologies have all seen significant invest-
ment from the world’s major militaries.
These changes will have profound im -
pacts on the nature of conflict. Not only 
will military platforms and weapons 
change, but MI systems will fuel the de-
velopment of entirely novel strategies, 
tactics, and concepts of operations. Per-
haps the most transformative applica-
tions of military MI are in command and 
control (C2). MI-enabled C2 could devel-
op entirely novel strategies, anticipate 
enemy tactics, accelerate intelligence, 
surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), 
and help coordinate activities of large 
numbers of dispersed units acting in 
tandem. As a greater share of decision-
making on the battlefield happens at 
machine speed, human thinkers may 
be unable to keep up. 
 THE focus of the policy debate 
around military applica -
tions of MI has centered around lethal 
autonomous weapons systems (LAWS). 
On one hand, many worry about the 
long-term implications of designing ma-
chines to kill human beings, citing the 
risks of losing control of the technology 
and of malicious actors being able to 
wreak havoc and create carnage at scale. 
On the other hand, some see an oppor-
tunity to free human soldiers from the 
most dangerous combat situations, help 
to alleviate the risks of human bias and 
misperception in combat, and for na -
tions like Russia and China, an opportu-
nity to upend the traditional military 
dominance of the United States by creat-
ing weapons that can fight and adapt at 
machine speed. 
There is also growing concern MI will 
also empower nonstate actors to de -
velop new asymmetric warfare tactics. 
Proliferation of MI capabilities in the 
commercial sector will provide broad, 
low-cost access to intelligent systems. 
Just as cyber capabilities have enabled 
small groups to damage national secu -
rity on a disproportionate scale, MI may 
spur new and unexpected threats. MI’s 
capacity to create indiscernible coun-
terfeits of audio and video provide one 
example. In 2017, Adobe demonstrated 
a new product that, with 10 minutes of 
audio, can replicate a person’s voice ex-
actly in limitless artificial audio.

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
18
CREATING 
A 
NATIONAL 
STRATEGY
To shape MI’s impact on our economy , 
national security, and society, the Unit-
ed States requires a comprehensive 
national strategy to coordinate efforts 
across the federal government and 
the private sector. This strategy should 
have two overarching goals. The first 
is to promote the safe and responsi -
ble development of MI technology. MI 
promises tremendous benefits, and 
capturing these should be a top priority 
for the U.S. government. The second is 
to maintain U.S. leadership in MI. MI will 
transform both economic and strategic 
power around the world, and leader -
ship in MI technology will be essential 
to securing our future.
Promoting the safe and responsible de-
velopment of MI technology will require 
us to reinforce our innovation base by 
funding long-term fundamental R&D 
in areas where the private sector is not 
clearly incentivized to invest. We must 
develop a workforce with the skills to 
both build and maintain innovative MI 
systems and work with and comple -
ment them in jobs that are not easily au-
tomated. We must create a flexible and 
open data ecosystem in which data-in -
tensive machine learning algorithms 
can thrive, while protecting privacy and 
preventing discrimination. We must also 
support the development of dynamic 
commercial markets for MI technologies

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
19
to leverage the innovative capacity of the private sec -
tor while ensuring that the technology is designed with 
security and safety in mind. Finally, we must anticipate 
and proactively manage the inevitable risks of MI tech-
nologies. MI will cause accidents, disruptions, and unin-
tended consequences, and if we do not have a strategy 
to deal with these challenges in advance, we are likely to 
fall into the trap of reactionary policymaking that poses 
the greatest risk to the development of the technology.
Maintaining U.S. leadership will require a forward-think-
ing, proactive approach to MI. The United States’ dom-
inant position in the global tech industry did not come 
about by accident. U.S. tech innovators benefit from 
strong investment in research and development, a flex-
The United States needs a comprehensive 
national strategy for machine 
intelligence to achieve two key goals:
1. Pr omote the safe and responsible 
development of MI technology.
2. Maint ain our global leadership in MI. 
QUICK GLANCE
ible regulatory environment that allows companies to 
innovate and adapt quickly to new technologies, and 
perhaps most importantly, a highly educated, dynamic 
workforce. Our national strategy should build on and re-
inforce those strengths. We must also establish strategic 
MI partnerships to leverage the comparative advantag-
es of our allies, promote our values around MI develop-
ment, and help shape global technical and governance 
standards around the development and use of MI. A 
United States with a clear national strategy for MI should 
play a central role in the development of MI technology 
and MI public policy around the world, and that will re -
quire strong strategic partnerships with our allies. 
Map of National Strategies
CANADA
Pan-Canadian Artificial 
Intelligence Strategy
 RELEASED 03 30 2017
Highlighted countries have released AI strategies
MEXICO
 IN DEVELOPMENT
UNITED KINGDOM
Growing the Artificial 
Intelligence Industry 
in the UK
 RELEASED 10 15 2017
CHINA
Next Generation Artificial 
Intelligence Development Plan
 RELEASED 07 20 2017
JAPAN
Artificial Intelligence 
Technology Strategy
 RELEASED 03 31 2017
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UAE Artificial 
Intelligence Strategy
 RELEASED 10 16 2017
MALAYSIA
 IN DEVELOPMENT
SINGAPORE
AI Singapore
 RELEASED 05 03 2017
SOUTH KOREA
Mid- to Long-Term 
Master Plan in 
Preparation for 
the Intelligence 
Information Society
 RELEASED 12 27 2016
INDIA
 IN DEVELOPMENT

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
STRATEGY
A
20
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
A.
Invest in 
the Continuing 
Research and 
Development of 
MI Technology
The seemingly sudden explosion of MI 
applications over the past five years 
was not the result of a single techno -
logical breakthrough. Instead, it repre -
sents the culmination of technological 
trends that created an environment in 
which MI could thrive. A national strat -
egy must not only maintain but also 
actively build upon this technological 
environment.
The first step for policymakers is to de -
velop a whole-of-government strategy 
for investment in fundamental MI R&D. 
Countries including Singapore, Japan, 
the United Kingdom, Canada, France, 
and Korea have all announced major 
MI funding initiatives in the past two 
years, representing well over a billion 
dollars of backing for new R&D pro -
jects. China dwarfs all other countries 
in the scale of its research ambition. 
After the July 2017 announcement of 
the country’s new MI development 
plan, local and provincial govern -
ments announced billions of dollars of 
support to the industry, with the cities 
of Xiangtan and Tianjin alone pledging 
a collective $7 billion to MI projects.
, 
In comparison, total U.S. government 
R&D investment in MI was $1.1 billion 
in 2015, and the Trump administra-
tion’s proposed budget would have 
cut the National Science Foundation’s 
MI research funding by 10 percent. 
The future of MI will be heavily shaped

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
21
by those at the forefront of its development, and 
we risk falling behind by underinvesting at this 
critical time.
Invest in government MI 
R&D that complements 
private-sector R&D.
Corporate research labs have filled part of the gap 
in MI R&D, and venture capitalists are investing 
heavily to bring new MI applications to market. 
Since 2012, venture capitalists have spent nearly 
$6 billion backing start-ups creating commercial 
MI applications. The largest companies in the 
technology sector, including Facebook, Apple, 
Google, Amazon, and Microsoft, spent an estimat-
ed $20–30 billion on MI in 2016. 
But private-sector investment alone is not enough. 
The federal government has a unique role to play 
in supporting the development of MI technology, 
and it must start by updating our research fund -
ing priorities to adapt to the unique challenges 
and opportunities of MI. The government is also 
singularly positioned to support research on the 
development of accountable, ethical or privacy- 
restrained MI that has little commercial advan -
tage, but significant societal benefit. 
Private investors focus primarily on projects with 
immediate and guaranteed commercial appli-
cations. There is little incentive for most compa -
nies to fund sustained work on exploratory pro -
jects with long incubation periods or uncertain 
prospects for returns. The federal government 
is in a unique position to support basic research 
that may not pay off for 20 to 30 years, but, like 
the internet, may prove revolutionary. As a 2016 
National Science and Technology Council report 
on MI R&D reported, the economic benefits of MI 
research will more than justify its costs, even in 
the current environment of cost-cutting across 
government. According to some studies, cur -

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
STRATEGY
A
22
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
rent levels of R&D spending are just one-half to 
one-quarter of the level that would produce opti-
mal economic growth. 
The U.S. government should fund a new genera -
tion of fundamental research into MI through uni-
versities, national labs, and the National Science 
Foundation. Providing researchers with access 
to federal institutions’ supercomputing resourc -
es could also help drive innovation in the field. 
The U.S. government can also support private- 
sector innovation through cooperative research 
and development agreements (CRADAs), loan 
guarantees and research grants from organi -
zations like the Small Business Administration 
(SBA). The SBA’s grant programs, including both 
the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) 
and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) 
programs, are major sources for startup support, 
representing the largest source of nondilutive, 
early-stage seed capital in the world. 
 OUR MI R&D strategy should also support 
the development of technologies 
and infrastructures that support MI develop -
ment. The U.S. discussion around MI has focused 
heavily on algorithms, but algorithms are one 
part of broader technological ecosystem. Federal 
investment should support not just direct re -
search into MI algorithms and the computing 
chips that power them (Graphics Processing 
Units, or GPUs) but also research in fields like 
materials science, batteries, high-performance 
and quantum computing, robotics, miniaturiza-
tion, and sensors that complement MI.
R&D investment can also help to keep the U.S. 
government abreast of innovation in the private 
sector. The U.S. private sector is our greatest com-
petitive edge in MI technology, and the U.S. gov -
ernment has long struggled to innovate internal -
ly. MI technologies will be essential for the U.S. 
government as it seeks to cut costs, generate new 
operational efficiencies for government agencies, 
and protect the nation and our citizens. Expanding 
funding to federal government programs like In-Q-
Tel, Defense Innovation Unit-Experimental (DIUx), 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DAR-
PA), and Intelligence Advanced Research Projects 
Activity (IARPA) to invest in MI research and MI 
startups will not only help to fund private-sector 
innovation, but will also strengthen ties between 
the government and MI innovators, keeping the 
U.S. government abreast of developments in the 
private sector and helping the U.S. government to 
leverage these advances.
Ensure that DoD and 
the national security 
community do not fall 
behind in the development 
and deployment of 
MI-enabled systems.
The government also has a unique interest in MI 
for national security applications, and we must 
ensure that we do not fall behind the develop -
ment of MI-enabled systems. This will require us 
to rethink our approach to bringing private-sector 
innovations into DoD. The Chinese government 
has recently taken steps to promote what they 
call “military-civil fusion” by creating opportuni -
ties for government and military researchers to 
partner with leading technology companies in the 
development of new products. China’s approach 
is based off of similar efforts in the United States, 
notably through programs like DoD’s DIUx and 
In-Q-Tel, which offer the security establishment 
a way to bypass cumbersome contract processes 
and accelerate the deployment of cutting-edge 
technologies within our military. 
But these programs are tiny compared to the be -
hemoth of traditional federal acquisitions, and 
we cannot expect a tiny part of the federal acqui-
sitions process to produce the bulk of our next 
generation of military capabilities. As the share of 
transformative innovation continues to shift to -
ward the commercial sector, these lean, agile ac -
quisition programs cannot remain the exception, 
they must become the norm, and we must expect 
and tolerate stumbles and problems as we learn 
to leverage these approaches at scale.

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
23
We also cannot afford to adopt dogmatic views 
of MI technologies that prevent us from exploring 
their potential. In the United States, lethal auton-
omous weapons systems (LAWS) often dominate 
conversations around military MI, and discussions 
around MI policy too often revolve around the 
dangers of “killer robots. ” This conversation is si-
multaneously premature and behind the times. 
Fully autonomous weapon systems remain far 
from combat-ready, and human soldiers are not 
going anywhere anytime soon. At the same time, 
the technology for private individuals to build sim-
ple autonomous killing machines at little cost al -
ready exists, as a professor from UC Berkeley iron-
ically demonstrated while advocating against the 
development of autonomous weapons. 
In 2016, the secretary of defense said, “whenever 
it comes to the application of force, there will nev-
er be true autonomy, because there’ll be humans 
(in the loop). ” This argument makes sense for 
today’s AI technology. Human-machine partner -
ships are far more effective and reliable than ful -
ly autonomous systems in complex and dynamic 
Invest in 
the Continuing 
Research and 
Development of 
MI Technology
combat environments, and are likely to remain so 
for a while. But if we rule out the possibility of fully 
autonomous combat systems, DoD risks missing 
out on a class of technologies that could funda -
mentally transform warfare.
Other countries like Russia and China are unlike -
ly to exercise the same restraint when it comes to 
fully autonomous weapons systems, which they 
view as an opportunity to leapfrog U.S. military 
dominance. If these countries were to field fully 
autonomous weapons systems that could analyze 
and adapt to our tactics and strategies at machine 
speed, it could render our defenses ineffective if 
we do not do the same. DoD should invest in the 
next generation of combat systems that leverage 
the full potential of AI, including the potential fu-
ture development of lethal AI systems that can op-
erate without humans in the loop. Instead of LAWS 
“never, ” our policy should be “not until they can 
outperform human/MI collaboration, ” including 
making ethically acceptable choices about when 
to “pull the trigger. ” 
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. F und long-term fundamental 
research where the private sector 
is unlikely to support adequate 
investment.
2. Inv est in technologies that 
support MI development.
3. Ensur e U.S. government access 
to cutting-edge technologies 
developed by the private sector.
4. Ensur e that DoD and the national 
security community do not fall 
behind in the development 
and deployment of MI-enabled 
systems.

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
STRATEGY
B
24
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
B.
Develop a 
Workforce 
for the MI Age
Though most conversations about lead-
ership and competitiveness in MI focus 
on the latest technological advances, 
what these breakthroughs really come 
down to are the people. It is the qual -
ity of our human talent that has ena -
bled the United States to achieve such 
a dominant position in the field of MI, 
and it will be the quality of our work -
force that will allow us to translate 
these MI technologies into growth and 
prosperity for our country. 
As we plan for the workforce of the fu -
ture, we need to think about both ed -
ucating the next generation of workers 
and retraining the current generation. 
While predictions of a “jobspocalypse” 
are overblown, it is impossible to deny 
that the accelerating adoption of MI 
and automation will cause significant 
changes in the U.S. workforce. It is like-
ly that new technological advances will 
create more than enough jobs to make 
up for those lost through automation, 
but current workers will confront ob -
stacles as they struggle to transition to 
new careers. Promoting investment in 
continuing education and job retrain-
ing will be crucial to managing these 
disruptions, and reforms to our coun-
try’s education system and social safety 
net may be required to ensure that all 
workers have the opportunity to quick-
ly transition to new roles.
Educate the 
MI workforce 
of the future.
Too often the debate around MI and ed-
ucation focuses on science, technology, 
engineering, and math (STEM) degree

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
25
programs, but STEM is both too broad 
and too narrow a term. While there is a 
shortage of qualified computer scien-
tists and MI experts, fields like the physi-
cal and life sciences are already oversat-
urated with graduates. Furthermore, the 
emphasis on hard skills and the sciences 
fails to address the need for workers that 
can complement MI technologies. Hard 
skills are often the easiest to replace 
with automation, while soft skills like 
empathy, communication, and critical 
thinking will only grow in importance as 
jobs working with MI systems become 
more common.
Our education strategy should focus 
on a two-pronged approach: develop a 
strong pool of technical talent that can 
build and operate the technology of the 
future, and build a broad workforce of 
quick-thinking, adaptable people with 
basic digital literacy and the soft skills to 
complement and work with machines.
The first step is to build the pipeline 
of MI talent by expanding degree pro -
grams in computer science and MI. 
The United States currently confronts 
a major shortage of talent in comput -
er science, and machine intelligence in 
particular. There are more than 510,000 
open computing jobs nationwide, but 
the number of computer science stu -
dents graduating in 2016 had the ca -
pacity to fill less than 10 percent of that 
need. Even among computer scientists, 
direct experience and education in ma-
chine intelligence is rare. MI experts are 
in such short supply that some com -
panies are offering up to $500,000 in 
starting salary to attract new graduates 
in the field. While some progress has al-
ready been made in building out com -
puter science degree programs and 
expanding the pipeline of future grad -
uates, many current graduates leave 
school with only general skills, and re -
quire extensive on the job training to 
work in specialized fields like MI.
The federal government can support 
technology education by funding re -
search on MI curricula design, and help-
ing to accredit MI education programs. 
Policymakers should also address the 
rising issue of professor retention, 
which is threatening to hollow out edu-
cational institutions and cripple our na-
tion’s capacity to train successive gen -
erations of MI talent. Exploding salaries 
for MI experts at companies like Google 
and Facebook have lured a significant 
number of professors away from their 
universities. One striking example of 
this was Uber’s 2015 recruitment of al -
most 30 percent of the staff at Carnegie 
Mellon’s National Robotics Engineering 
Centre. To reverse this trend, policy -
makers must expand funding for univer-
sity MI programs and research grants to 
ensure our nation does not lose its ca -
pacity to sustain its innovative edge.
We also need to invest in universal 
digital literacy from an early age. The 
MI-augmented jobs of the future will 
require at least a basic level of under -
standing of digital systems and MI. A re-
cent study found only 30 percent of jobs

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
STRATEGY
B
26
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
now require only low levels of digital 
skill, down from 56 percent in 2002, indi-
cating a shrinking window of opportuni-
ty for students who emerge from school 
without the ability to effectively work 
with digital systems. This does not mean 
that everyone will need to be able to 
write MI code; far fewer jobs in the future 
will require programming a computer 
than will require interacting with one. 
But it does mean that students will need 
to have some exposure to programming 
to understand at a high level how digital 
systems work, what they can and cannot 
do, and how humans can effectively col-
laborate with them.
Training everyone to be a software de -
veloper would be counterproductive, 
but a basic understanding of computer 
science and MI cannot remain a niche 
interest or specialized skill, it must be -
come part of the same universal basic 
toolkit as reading and arithmetic. From 
K-12 through undergraduate and grad -
uate education, digital and MI literacy 
should be integrated into curriculum 
development and accreditation pro -
grams to ensure that the next genera -
tion, regardless of the field they go into, 
is able to participate in the MI-enabled 
economy of the future.
Besides basic digital literacy, many 
agree that the most important skills for 
future workers will be soft skills like cre-
ativity, critical thinking, emotional intel-
ligence, and adaptability. These skills 
are difficult for machines to replicate 
but critical to most businesses, making 
them resilient to automation and in -
creasingly valuable as the role of human 
workers shifts to complementing the ca-
pabilities of MI systems. The ideal profile 
of the worker of the future is someone 
with technical proficiency, rather than 
mastery, and a background that will al-
low them to be a lifelong learner capa -
ble of applying their creativity and criti-
cal-thinking skills to a constantly shifting 
set of jobs and tasks performed in part-
nership with machines. To support the 
growth of these skills, policymakers 
should reemphasize the liberal arts and 
multidisciplinary programs that concen-
trate on graduating adaptable students 
capable of thriving in an uncertain work-
force environment.
In the long term, MI could transform ed-
ucation in two fundamental ways. First, 
MI systems could be integrated into the 
classroom, supporting human teachers 
and providing 
a personalized 
learning experi-
ence and curric -
ulum suited to 
each individual 
student’s needs. 
These MI teach -
ers could also 
be integrated 
into online and 
virtual classes 
to reach a larg -
er pool of stu -
dents around the 
world. Second, 
as MI becomes 
ubiquitous in 
the workplace, the accelerating pace 
of technological change will require 
continuous education and training 
throughout our careers to keep up with 
the technology and maintain our skills. 
The current education system, in which 
we are educated and build our core 
skillset in our early years and then work 
through the rest of our lives, may no 
longer be sustainable. The Department 
of Education should organize a working 
group to study the long-term implica -
tions of MI for the education system, 
and how policymakers can work with 
“a basic understanding 
of computer science 
and MI cannot remain 
a niche interest or 
specialized skill, 
it must become part 
of the same universal 
basic toolkit 
as reading 
and arithmetic.”

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
27
educators and industry to build an ed -
ucation system that both leverages the 
potential of MI in teaching and meets 
the needs of the MI economy. 
Attract and retain 
the world’s best 
MI talent.
We should also ensure that graduates 
of these programs stay in the United 
States to work, invest, and build busi -
nesses. One of the greatest strengths 
of the United States is our ability to 
attract talented and skilled workers 
from abroad. The United States is the 
number one immigration destination in 
the world, particularly for people with 
advanced education and skills, and we 
educate and train many of the world’s 
leading entrepreneurs and innovators. 
 WHILE countries like China are 
working to incentivize 
Chinese-born and Chinese-American 
tech entrepreneurs to return to China, 
the United States is increasingly pushing 
away foreign talent, including limiting 
H1-B visas. Efforts to create more oppor-
tunities for Americans to get high-paying 
jobs by limiting access to those positions 
for foreigners makes it difficult for U.S. 
companies to access elite MI talent from 
other countries, or forces them to invest 
in innovation centers in other countries 
that are more welcoming to foreign tal-
ent. One of the biggest beneficiaries is 
Canada, where companies like Google, 
Facebook, Microsoft, and Uber have set 
up innovation centers to get around U.S. 
visa restrictions. 
Cracking down on immigration will not 
only fail to create more opportunities 
for Americans to get high-paying jobs, 
it will stifle economic growth and com-
petitiveness across the economy. In -
stead of trying to spur growth by turn -
ing away foreign workers, we need to 
embrace immigration and ensure that 
the next generation of MI entrepre -
neurs, wherever they are born, build 
the technology of the future in the Unit-
ed States. 
One key step is to expand H1-B visas 
and make it easier for H1-B recipients 
to settle their lives and families in 
the United States. This will allow U.S. 
companies access to foreign workers 
while investing and creating jobs in 
the United States, instead of building 
innovation centers and funding R&D 
overseas. We should also establish 
graduation visas to ensure that stu -
dents who are trained and educated 
in our elite universities can put those 
skills to work in this country after they 
complete their degrees. Finally, we 
should expand incentives for entrepre -
neurs to set up businesses in the Unit -
ed States, including offering entrepre -
neurship visas to innovators who want 
to build businesses here.
The 
Canadian 
Microsoft 
building. 
photo by 
raysonho @ 
open grid 
scheduler/ 
grid engine

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
STRATEGY
B
28
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
Reskill today’s workforce 
for tomorrow’s economy.
Surveys of company executives have consistently 
shown that lack of talent and technical knowledge 
is among the largest barriers to more widespread 
adoption of MI tools. In PwC’s Digital IQ survey, only 
20 percent of executives said their organizations had 
the skills necessary to succeed with AI. With the right 
talent, MI could transform most industries, allowing 
them to improve efficiency, provide more tailored, 
personalized products and services, improve qual-
ity control, and better manage their supply chains. 
Current workers may lack technical skills and digital 
literacy, but they understand the businesses, prod-
ucts, and customers that they work with, and that 
experience and exposure could be highly valuable to 
their companies if they can develop new skills.
The government should work with private part -
ners to develop guidance and provide resources 
for firms interested in developing talent within 
their own workforces to adopt MI tools. One ex -
ample of this is the SBA’s Small Business Technol-
ogy Coalition, a partnership with companies like 
Google, Microsoft, and Facebook offering digital 
training resources to small businesses. Expand -
ing and deepening the training provided through 
these types of programs could help many firms 
acquire the skills necessary to begin taking advan-
tage of MI. The U.S. government should also work 
with the private sector to develop incentives like 
tax credits for firms that invest in continuing edu -
cation and training to retool their workforces.
We should also expand and reform federal retrain-
ing programs to best serve the needs of displaced 
workers. In its December 2016 report on artificial 
intelligence, automation, and the economy, the 
White House pointed out that the United States 
spends far less than other Organization for Eco -
nomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
countries on active labor market policies designed 
to help workers navigate job transitions. OECD 
countries spent an average of 0.6 percent of GDP 
on such programs in 2014, compared to just 0.1 
percent in the United States. Furthermore, while 
the pace of technological change has accelerated 
since the 1980s, federal retraining programs have 
stagnated. Relative to the overall economy, the 
United States spends less than half on such pro -
grams than we did 30 years ago. 
Not all retraining programs are created equal, 
however. Recent assessments of the Workforce 
Investment Act (WIA) adult and dislocated worker 
programs have shown that the initiatives in ques -
tion are generally ineffective at increasing worker 
earnings or employment rates. Part of the failure 
of these programs can be attributed to their or -
ganization as a system of discreet programs ser -
vicing different pools of workers. General savings 
and incentive programs for all workers to pursue 
continuing education and training throughout 
their careers could be more effective, and allow 
workers to identify the skills and expertise most 
relevant to the needs of their industries. The gov -
ernment should also improve job-search assis -
NOTE: Data for 
Estonia and New 
Zealand from 
2014; Data for UK 
from 2011
SOURCE: OECD 
Statistics (2015)

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
29
tance programs and other counseling resources 
helping match workers to jobs and reduce the 
time displaced individuals spend unemployed. 
Community-based retraining initiatives with 
deep connections to local industry have been 
shown to be the most effective model for retrain -
ing. In addition to broad national-level programs 
to support the development of new skills, the 
U.S. government should establish programs to 
support community-based and state and local 
retraining efforts. The future of adult retraining 
will be led by community colleges developing 
partnerships with local employers to provide 
students with the skills they need to succeed in 
the jobs their communities require. These col-
leges will also be at the forefront of a new wave 
of online education, giving support to students 
turning to the emerging ecosystem of online ed -
ucation to re-skill and take advantage of new op -
portunities within their industry. 
To support workers displaced by automation, 
policymakers should also consider expanding 
and reforming the social safety net to provide 
for the basic needs of citizens as they transition 
jobs or undergo retraining. Essential components 
of reform include unemployment insurance, 
work-sharing programs, welfare, and wage insur -
ance. Strengthening unemployment benefits and 
welfare programs would help individuals be more 
resilient to job loss, allowing them the opportuni-
ty to retrain and seek new jobs without falling into 
poverty. These programs would also help insulate 
local economies from shocks caused by mass lay -
offs. Other measures like work-sharing programs 
could allow businesses to avoid laying off workers 
by instead reducing hours. Finally, initiatives like 
wage insurance could soften the blow for workers 
taking new, lower-paying jobs, and encourage dis-
placed individuals to quickly reintegrate into the 
economy even if it meant taking a job where they 
would earn less. 
 
Develop a 
workforce for 
the MI age
1. E xpand degree programs in 
computer science and especially 
machine intelligence. 
2. Inv est in universal basic digital 
literacy for the next generation. 
3. R eemphasize the development 
of soft skills and the importance 
of liberal arts education.
RECOMMENDATIONS
4. Conv ene a DoE working group to 
study the long-term implications 
of MI for the nation’s education 
system.
5. Cr eate an immigration system 
that welcomes foreign talent.
6. Inc entivize firms to invest in 
continuing education for their 
current workers. 
7. E xpand continuing education 
and retraining programs for 
today’s workers, and the workers 
of the future. 
8. S trengthen the social safety net 
to support workers in transition.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
STRATEGY
C
30
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
C.
Create a Flexible 
and Open Data 
Ecosystem in 
Which MI Can Thrive
An essential input to the development 
of MI systems is access to large amounts 
of high-quality training data. MI sys -
tems are data hungry. They require 
massive datasets to identify unique 
patterns and insights. For example, 
experts estimate autonomous vehicles 
will need to process 40 terabytes of 
data a day to drive around city streets 
absent our guidance. This is the equiva-
lent of roughly 20 billion single-spaced 
pages of typewritten information. 
The amount of data generated in the 
world has exploded as a result of the 
growth of smart phones and connected 
devices, the so-called internet of things 
(IoT). Ninety percent of the data in the 
world today has been created in the last 
two years, and that growth rate contin-
ues to accelerate. From 2011 to 2017, 
the share of Americans who owned 
smartphones more than doubled, from 
35 percent to over 77 percent. Com -
bined with the proliferation of other 
internet-enabled devices, from toasters 
to cars, roads, and refrigerators, this 
trend has provided vast troves of data 
upon which to train MI algorithms.
One of the primary reasons for U.S. 
dominance in the field of MI is our coun-
try’s unique data ecosystem, which af -
fords MI researchers a large user base, 
expansive access to public data sets, 
and a supportive regulatory regime. In 
such an environment, researchers and 
developers are able to take full advan -
tage of the country’s accelerating data 
production to create MI technologies 
with unparalleled power and intelli -
gence. Policymakers should build upon

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
31
this competitive advantage to ensure 
that U.S. MI developers continue to 
have access to the most open and flexi-
ble data ecosystem in the world.
One thing policymakers can do is ex -
pand access to datasets owned and 
managed by the U.S. government. 
Federal agencies hold many unique 
datasets that are valuable to MI devel -
opers, and opening these datasets up 
to the public could have an enormous 
impact on the creation of new MI appli-
cations. For example, when the govern-
ment made the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) 
weather and climate data publicly 
accessible, they created an industry 
worth over $32 billion a year. Unlocking 
other federal datasets like unclassified 
satellite imagery, transportation data, 
and financial information would create 
new opportunities for MI innovation 
and allow for dramatic improvements 
in the delivery of public services. The 
federal government can also work with 
state and local governments to explore 
new ways to share their datasets and 
integrate them with federal data across 
shared platforms. 
Making this data available in easy- 
to-use, machine-readable formats is 
also important. The government can 
begin by harmonizing its own stand -
ards for structuring and labeling data, 
and should work with the private sector 
to create standards to enable sharing 
between the government and industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
STRATEGY
C
32
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
Policymakers can also play a role in re -
moving barriers to the sharing of pri -
vate-sector data between firms. Regu -
lators and agency officials 
can promulgate standards 
and publish guidance to 
help firms navigate con -
cerns over the applicability 
of competition or privacy 
laws when sharing custom-
er data. Public-private part -
nerships can be leveraged 
to provide frameworks to 
facilitate the sharing of data 
between organizations, and 
incentives can be devised 
to encourage firms to make 
their data available through 
open application program 
interfaces (APIs). Though it 
will be important to develop 
privacy and data protection 
regulations for this new do -
main to safeguard consum -
ers, policymakers will have to 
ensure that rules are tailored 
to avoid stifling innovation. 
Ensuring a supportive eco -
system in the United States 
will be particularly crucial 
given the natural advantage 
some countries like China 
have due to the scale of their 
data production. China will 
be home to 20 percent of the 
world’s data by 2020, and 
30 percent by 2030, giving 
their MI developers the opportunity to 
access enormous datasets to train their 
models. 
But U.S. innovators also have advantag-
es. China may have a huge consumer 
market but U.S. companies have larger 
global market share. Chinese compa-
nies dominate the domestic market, but 
have struggled to compete globally. Chi-
“While China 
may have 3 
percent of 
the world’s 
data, U.S. 
companies have 
a tremendous 
head start 
on cornering 
the other 70 
percent of the 
global data 
market.”

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
33
na has 1.4 billion people, but Facebook has more 
than 2 billion users worldwide. Gmail has more us-
ers than any Chinese email service, and Facebook 
Messenger and WhatsApp have more users than 
any Chinese messaging service., As a result, while 
China may have 30 percent of the world’s data, U.S. 
companies have a tremendous head start on cor -
nering the other 70 percent of the global data mar-
ket. These users are also more diverse and more 
global than users of Chinese services like WeChat 
and QQ. China’s data is almost entirely on Chinese 
consumers, whereas U.S. companies like Facebook 
and Google have users around the world. This is an 
important advantage.
But U.S. tech companies’ position in foreign mar -
kets is under threat from policies that make it 
more difficult for U.S. companies to compete. Pri-
vacy advocates in the United States are also push-
ing for greater protections for data. Even close 
allies like the European Union are developing 
policies like the General Data Protection Regula -
tion (GDPR) that create challenges for U.S. firms. 
The U.S. government must develop a strategy to 
combat protectionism, data localization, and pri -
vacy policies that harm our global tech compa -
nies. Doing this effectively will require balancing 
legitimate concerns around privacy and consumer 
protection both in the United States and abroad 
with the need for an open, flexible data ecosystem 
that supports innovation and experimentation in 
AI. We should also use trade agreements and es -
tablish bilateral and multilateral partnerships to 
promote the free flow of data and support collab-
oration in R&D for emerging technologies. 
Create a flexible 
and open data 
ecosystem in 
which MI can 
thrive
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Mak e U.S. government datasets 
available to MI developers and 
users. 
2. Work with s tate and local 
governments and foreign 
governments to open up 
datasets to public use. 
3. Es tablish standards and 
taxonomies that ensure that data 
sets made available through 
open-data initiatives are machine 
readable and interoperable. 
4. Enc ourage private-sector data 
sharing and novel uses of data 
while protecting privacy and 
data security. 
5. De fend the free flow of data 
across national borders and 
combat data localization.

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
STRATEGY
D
34
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
D.
Create 
Thoughtful 
Public Policy to 
Spur MI Adoption 
and Reduce Barriers
Policymakers should also pursue meas-
ures that help spur demand for MI tech-
nologies, growing the market for MI 
tools and giving room for new U.S. MI 
enterprises to expand. Currently, en -
terprise adoption of MI is low. A Sep -
tember 2017 study released by the MIT 
Sloan Management Review found that 
only 5 percent of surveyed companies 
had extensively incorporated MI into 
their offerings, and less than 40 percent 
had any MI strategy in place. A range of 
barriers exist for companies interested 
in adopting MI tools, including a lack of 
IT infrastructure, lack of access to tal -
ent, uncertainties over regulations and 
customer rights, and high cost of imple-
mentation. While many of these issues 
can be addressed at the enterprise lev -
el, the federal government can support 
the adoption of automation and MI by 
firms by removing legal and regulatory 
obstacles and creating incentives for MI 
adoption.
For businesses, lack of adequate IT in -
frastructure capable of supporting MI 
is a key barrier to deploying the tech -
nology. A survey conducted by Vanson 
Bourne and Teradata found that 40 
percent of respondents cited lack of 
IT infrastructure as a key barrier to MI 
realization. MI adoption is consistently 
higher among organizations that have 
already invested in the necessary sup -
porting infrastructure, including big 
data and cloud computing. To support 
the adoption of IT solutions that will

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
35
Automated 
production 
line at 
automobile 
plant.
enable future MI deployment, the U.S. 
government should look into partner -
ing with lenders and technology com -
panies to create loan guarantee pro -
grams to support IT modernization. The 
program could fund adoption of cloud 
solutions and data analyt -
ics, partnering borrowers 
with private-sector experts 
to help companies integrate 
these new services into their 
operations and prepare for 
wider adoption of MI tools. 
Tax incentives like the re -
search and experimentation 
(R&E) tax credit could also 
be expanded to encourage 
businesses to put resourc -
es towards developing their 
own internal machine intel-
ligence services.
Federal procurement poli-
cies may also be leveraged 
to provide guidance to the private 
sector on the responsible adoption 
of MI technologies. In the defense 
sector, this will mean reforming the 
infamously convoluted procurement 
process to enable quicker adoption of 
new MI technologies. DoD efforts like 
the Silicon Valley-based DIUx should 
be encouraged as opportunities to cre -
ate new and streamlined pathways to -
ward the acquisition of new advanced 
technologies. Throughout the rest of 
“For businesses, lack 
of IT infrastructure 
capable of supporting 
MI is a key barrier 
to deploying the 
technology.”

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
STRATEGY
D
36
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
the federal government, it will be es -
sential for federal IT modernization 
efforts to promote the adoption of MI 
and enabling technologies within the 
U.S. government.
 THE U.S. government can also 
work to eliminate regulatory 
uncertainty and questions around lia -
bility that arise from MI. Many business-
es face barriers to deployment due to 
uncertainty over the application of ex -
isting legal and regulatory regimes to 
the case of machine intelligence. An ex-
ample of this is in the automated vehi -
cles (AV) industry, where Congress has 
recently been working to update the 
current federal safety standards to ac -
commodate self-driving cars and pre -
vent the emergence of a patchwork of 
state regulations governing the devel -
opment and deployment of AVs. 
“Many businesses face 
barriers to deployment 
due to uncertainty over the 
application of existing legal 
and regulatory regimes to the 
case of machine intelligence.”
As a first step, the president should in -
struct all federal regulatory agencies 
to initiate a voluntary consultation 
process with companies on potential 
applications of MI in their industries 
and where regulatory uncertainty is im-
peding the adoption of MI. The goal of 
these consultations should be to iden -
tify steps that can be taken to reduce 
regulatory uncertainty and promote 
the safe and responsible adoption of MI 
across the sector. 
One critical area to clarify is in the do -
main of liability. As MI-powered prod -
ucts like self-driving cars or medical 
diagnostic tools become more wide -
spread, mistakes and accidents caused 
by these systems will become more 
common. Especially in situations where 
a human and an MI system are working 
in tandem, the extent of each party’s 
relative liability will be a thorny ques -

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
37
tion that courts must resolve before enterprises 
can assess their potential risk when developing or 
adopting MI tools. 
There are two initial steps that can be taken to ad-
dress legal uncertainty around the use of MI. First, 
the government should commission a panel of le-
gal and technical experts to examine existing law 
and precedent and identify areas where the use 
of MI creates questions around the application of 
core principles of U.S. law. This panel should be 
given a mandate to articulate a set of legal prin -
ciples that can be used in the governance and 
application of liability to MI systems that act au -
tonomously or in concert with humans, and how 
these principles can be implemented through leg-
islation or through interpretation of existing law. 
Create thoughtful 
public policy to 
spur MI adoption 
and reduce 
barriers
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Inc entivize firms to invest in IT 
modernization to support MI. 
2. Ins truct regulators to initiate 
voluntary consultations with 
the private sector on key steps 
to reduce regulatory uncertainty 
and support safe and responsible 
adoption of MI across their sectors. 
3. Es tablish a commission of legal 
and technical experts to examine 
the application of core principles 
of U.S. law to MI.
4. Dev elop a training program 
for judges and attorneys on 
current MI technologies and 
the application of legal 
principles to MI.
Second, the findings of this panel should inform a 
training program for judges and attorneys to pro -
vide basic technical literacy around existing MI 
technologies and an overview of the application of 
legal principles to MI applications. Judicial inter -
pretation and precedent will play a key role in de-
fining the legal landscape for MI. When the Human 
Genome Project transformed forensics and crimi -
nal justice, the Department of Justice, Department 
of Energy, and National Institutes of Health invest-
ed in education programs for judges and attorneys 
to ensure that the legal system was prepared for 
new uses of DNA evidence. The implications of ma-
chine intelligence for the legal system will likely be 
far broader and even more complex, and our jus -
tice system must respond with appropriate urgen-
cy to ensure it has the technical capacity to handle 
the questions that will begin to emerge.

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
STRATEGY
E
38
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
E.
Develop 
Proactive 
Strategies 
to Manage 
MI’s Risks
MI technology continues to evolve , and 
will likely look very different in a few 
years’ time, but there are many risks 
and challenges around the technology 
that must be proactively addressed. A 
well-thought-out strategy to manage 
MI’s challenges can help build consum-
er trust in the technology and help us to 
avoid falling into a trap of reactionary 
policymaking when accidents inevita -
bly happen. At the same time, we must 
ensure that any rules and controls we 
put in place make sense for the tech -
nology and do not strangle the com -
mercial MI industry.
The first, and perhaps most difficult, 
risk to address will be bias and discrim-
ination. MI systems are designed to 
shape our behavior and perform tasks 
on our behalf, meaning that when they 
demonstrate bias they can have pro -
found impacts on human opportunity. 
MI systems often exhibit implicit bias, 
either imparted inadvertently by their 
creators or by the data on which they 
were trained. Google’s ad targeting 
software, for example, has been found 
to target job ads for high-paying exec -
utive positions far more frequently to 
male web users than female ones. This 
discrimination was not intentional, 
however, with researchers instead sug-
gesting that Google had simply “lost 
control over its massive, automated 
advertising system, ” noting that “Even 
without advertisers placing inappropri-

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
39
ate bids, large-scale machine learning can behave 
in unexpected ways. ” 
It will also be crucial to manage the risks of physi-
cal harm that come as MI systems come to play an 
increasing role in controlling real-world systems. 
The most salient example of safety risks is auton -
omous vehicles, where failure of sensors or other 
equipment can lead to fatal consequences. How-
ever, AVs are only the first wave of what promises 
to become a flood of new robotic systems interact-
ing with us on a daily basis. The coming ubiquity 
of drones in our skies and robots in our homes will 
demand the active management of safety risks, 
not only to protect against isolated malfunctions, 
but also against cascading failures of networked 
systems. 
Perhaps the most visible and widely discussed risk 
associated with machine intelligence is the issue 
of control. While concerns over the emergence of 
malevolent MI systems are badly overblown, this 
should not distract us from the importance of de -
veloping robust incentive structures and ethical 
systems to guarantee that MI systems operate 
with our best interests in mind. For example, now 
that MI programs can lie, it will be up to humans 
to ensure that they do not. The United States had 
its first taste of the damage that could be done 
by autonomous systems in 2010, when automat -
ed stock-trading programs caused a “flash crash” 
that erased nearly $1 trillion of wealth in minutes. 
As we prepare to turn an increasing share of the 
management of our society over to MI systems, it 
will be of paramount importance that we ensure 
these programs are both predictable and control-
lable by humans to prevent such destructive fail -
ures from occurring in the future. 
The government will have to play a major role in 
managing the risks of MI technologies. While apoc-
alyptic warnings by some in the tech community 
are overblown, we will not be able to ignore the 
range of more subtle risks posed by issues of priva-
cy, algorithmic bias, system safety and control. As 
individuals increasingly come to rely on MI technol-
ogies to manage social services and support deci-
sionmaking in sensitive domains like health care, 
Waymo CEO 
John Krafcik 
delivers a 
speech about 
self-driving cars 
at the 2017 
Web Summit 
in Lisbon on 
Nov. 7, 2017.
photo by 
patricia de melo 
moreira/afp/
getty images

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
STRATEGY
E
40
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
employment, and criminal justice, the government 
will have a responsibility to ensure that these tech-
nologies are being deployed appropriately. It is 
unrealistic to expect that MI systems will ever be 
perfectly error-free, so government should instead 
focus on managing the risks that we can anticipate 
and establishing clear plans and expectations to 
deal with failures when they do arise. 
To help policymakers understand and appropri -
ately respond to emerging MI risks, the federal 
government should establish an advisory com-
mittee of experts from industry and academia to 
support government decisionmaking about MI, 
similar to the proposed FUTURE of AI Act. The 
committee could provide technical expertise and 
expert advice to the Commerce Department as 
they consider the implications of MI in the Unit -
ed States, addressing not only risk management 
but also workforce development, research priori -
ties, data accessibility, and ethical standards. The 
committee would help the department to identify 
barriers to innovation and growth, and provide 
recommendations on how to address emerging is-
sues in MI in a way that avoids stifling innovation.
The U.S. government should create a new initia -
tive through the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) to develop safety, ethics, 
and control standards for MI applications. NIST , 
in cooperation with industry and international 
partners, should articulate a set of technical and 
governance standards for safe and responsible 
MI development and use. The U.S. government 
should also step up engagement with internation-
al standards-making bodies to promote global 
standards for safe and ethical MI.
NIST should also initiate voluntary consultations 
with the private sector on the development of a 
testing and certification regime for MI systems. 
Contextual audits and other testing mechanisms 
may be the only way to provide oversight with 
MI systems too complex to understand through 
source code analysis. Federal agencies should 
be directed to engage with industry partners and 
NIST to examine the viability of using testing to 
manage safety, control, and discrimination risks 
for programs adopted by the federal government 
in sensitive or high-risk domains.
Even with clear standards for MI development 
and use and a testing regime to anticipate and ad-
dress problems, it is unreasonable to expect that 
MI systems will ever be perfectly predictable or 
error-free. Mistakes will inevitably be made by MI 
programs, and accidents will occur. Federal reg-
ulators should be proactive in articulating a set 
of expectations for how MI developers should re -
spond to system failures. Clarifying expectations 
will not only reduce uncertainty for MI companies, 
it will help guide efforts to build control mech-
anisms into MI systems and assist in heading off 
public uproar in the event of MI accidents.
The advance of MI will also pose new privacy risks 
for individuals as data-collection activities are 
expanded to power new MI systems. As more of 
our devices become connected to the internet, 
the granularity of data available to corporations, 
marketers, and governments about our daily lives 
will introduce new possibilities for scoring and 
surveillance. And even if the companies collecting 
our data commit to its responsible use, consum -
ers still face risks from outside parties capable of 
stealing sensitive information or combining an -
onymized data in ways that allows for re-identifi -
cation of users. 
While the rise of big data has led to the normaliza-
tion of increasingly detailed data collection from 
technology users, consumer trends have clearly 
indicated that most citizens value personalized 
services more than maintaining strict control of 
the data they produce. As such, it would be un -
wise for the United States to consider implement-
ing a strict data privacy regime such as the Euro -
pean Union’s General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) at the risk of stifling innovation. At the end 
of the day, however, the United States will not be 
the only market American technology companies 
will target. The government should thus work with 
industry to ensure that MI systems developed in 
the United States remain internationally viable in 
the face of advancing data regulations in places 
like the European Union.

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
41
Though the adoption of a GDPR-like data privacy 
regime would be unwise in the context of ensur -
ing continued American innovation, the absence 
of regulation will only make it more important for 
the government to actively engage with industry 
through other channels to proactively manage the 
emerging privacy risks associated with big data 
and machine intelligence. In particular, the wide -
spread availability of user data collected through 
online services and connected devices will create 
new incentives for companies to share data. The 
use of data for purposes outside the context of its 
initial collection threatens user control and priva-
cy, and risks eroding consumer trust throughout 
the digital economy. In response, the government 
should work with a transparent, industry-led pro -
cess to develop standards and codes of conduct 
for data collection and use to manage the privacy 
risks created by MI.
The United States should be careful, however, to 
avoid overburdening the MI industry with restric -
tive regulations. In countries like China, MI de -
velopers have an advantage over their American 
and European counterparts due to a lack of regu -
latory obstacles, especially in the crucial areas of 
real-world trials and mass data collection. As for -
mer Google China president Kai-Fu Lee states, “in 
driverless cars, the United States has about a two-
year head start, but each minute American tech 
companies find themselves mired in a regulatory 
battle or hobbled by objections from transporta -
tion incumbents, the Chinese can close that gap. ” 
Regulation also damages Europe’s competitive -
ness. Stringent EU regulations on the collection 
and storage of personal data greatly complicates 
algorithmic development, and their restrictions 
on automated decisionmaking make the EU mar -
ket hostile to MI companies. The United States 
should be careful not to share this fate, and should 
be wary when considering protections for user pri-
vacy to allow sufficient flexibility to maintain the 
innovative capacity of U.S. businesses while si -
multaneously managing privacy and safety risks 
for individuals. 
Develop 
proactive 
strategies to 
manage MI’s risks
1. Es tablish a U.S. MI Advisory 
Committee through legislation 
like the FUTURE of AI Act 
to advise the Commerce 
Department on MI governance.
RECOMMENDATIONS
2. Dev elop technical and 
governance standards for 
safe and responsible MI.
3. Articula te clear expectations 
for companies that develop 
and deploy MI in the event 
of accidents.
4. Consult with indus try on 
the feasibility of a testing 
regime for MI.
5. Eng age with industry leaders to 
devise an internationally viable 
privacy regime for the MI era.

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
STRATEGY
F
42
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
F.
Lead the Development 
of MI Technology 
and MI Governance 
around the World 
through Strategic 
MI Partnerships
Leadership does not mean building 
our MI capabilities alone. Internation-
al partnerships can help us to develop 
and deploy technology more quickly, 
and share our values, approaches, and 
standards with the rest of the world.
First, we should establish research part-
nerships with other MI leaders to devel-
op new MI technologies. Countries like 
Canada and the United Kingdom have 
been historic leaders in the field of MI 
due to the strength of the research 
from academics and startups in cities 
like London, Toronto, and Montreal. 
Strengthening the United States’ ability 
to collaborate with technology leaders 
in these countries will significantly im -
prove our capacity for innovation and 
help keep the United States on the cut-
ting edge of new MI development. In 
particular, policymakers can support 
the creation of exchange programs for 
MI researchers and students, ensure 
an open and streamlined immigration 
process for experts from these nations, 
and create new opportunities for in -
vestment to flow between our coun -
tries. In the case of Canada, the United 
States could also benefit from the es -
tablishment of “innovation corridors” 
like the one proposed between Seattle

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
43
and Vancouver, which could improve 
access to talent and investment for MI 
developers on both sides of the border. 
We should also look to leverage the 
comparative advantages of other coun-
tries whose strengths complement our 
own. The United States has established 
clear global leadership in the develop -
ment of machine cognition and other 
MI software domains, but in areas like 
smart manufacturing and robotics, our 
country still lags places like Germany 
and Japan. Policymakers should look 
to build partnerships that would allow 
our countries to build off each other’s 
capabilities. An example of this is the 
work done by Germany’s Industrie 4.0 
and the U.S. Industrial Internet Consor-
tium to develop common standards for 
intelligent manufacturing that leverage 
both the United States’ strength in soft-
ware and big data, and Germany’s man-
ufacturing expertise. 
As MI extends the reach of digital sys -
tems into the physical world, it will 
place a significant burden on natural 
resources, particularly rare earth ele -
ments used in computing and batteries 
and metals and plastics used in con -
structing robots and cyber-physical 
systems. The growth of MI and associ -
ated technologies will likely continue

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
STRATEGY
F
44
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
“Strengthening the 
United States’ ability 
to collaborate with 
technology leaders in 
these countries will 
significantly improve 
our capacity for 
innovation and help 
keep the United States 
on the cutting edge of 
new MI development.”

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
45
to fuel demand for these raw mate -
rials, many of which are produced in 
developing regions, for example South 
America’s “lithium triangle, ” which pro-
duces more than half of the world’s 
lithium. China is making significant in -
vestments in companies and infrastruc-
ture and developing extensive political 
partnerships with these countries in 
order to secure control of their natural 
resources, recognizing the importance 
of these raw materials to Chinese com -
petitiveness in emerging industries like 
autonomous and electric vehicles. The 
United States should do the same. 
Finally, the United States should step 
up its participation in international MI 
standards and governance bodies to 
strengthen its influence over the fu-
ture direction of artificial intelligence. 
Organizations like the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), Inter -
national Organization for Standardi -
zation (ISO), and Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) are al-
ready beginning to establish initiatives 
to develop technical, ethical, and gov -
ernance standards for the development 
of MI, and the decisions reached by 
those involved will play a powerful role 
in shaping the future of the technology. 
China is already racing to gain influence 
over these bodies, with its recent Next 
Generation Artificial Intelligence De -
velopment Plan including explicit calls 
for the country’s MI enterprises to send 
representatives to these meetings and 
help take the lead in formulating new 
international standards. The United 
States should be assertive in promoting 
its own vision for MI in these organiza -
tions, but first the United States must 
articulate what that vision should be. 
An MI national strategy would give pol -
icymakers the opportunity to establish 
a clear set of values the United States 
believes should govern the future of MI, 
and enable our country to more pro -
ductively engage with the international 
community in shaping MI’s future. 
Lead the 
development of 
MI technology 
and MI 
governance 
around the world 
through strategic 
MI partnerships
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Es tablish research partnerships 
with allied nations to develop 
new MI technologies. 
2. L everage the comparative 
advantages of allies in MI-
enabling technologies. 
3. Es tablish resource partnerships 
with developing nations. 
4. S tep up participation in 
international technical and 
governance standards bodies 
to shape the global trajectory 
of MI technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
46
CONCLUSION
It will take time to craft and implement 
all of the elements of a national MI pol -
icy, but we must act now to establish a 
cohesive national MI strategy. As a first 
step, the president should designate an 
MI lead at the White House to coordinate 
the development and implementation 
of a strategy and ensure that this is a pri-
ority across the federal government. This 
person should prioritize reviewing and 
implementing the 2016 AI R&D Strategy 
recommended by the National Science 
and Technology Council. Federal agen-
cies and regulators should also initiate 
consultations with the private sector 
and MI experts in academia to ensure 
that our approach is flexible enough to 
adapt over time and appropriate to the 
technology. These discussions will take 
time, but will help to guide the efforts 
of policymakers and ensure that MI gov-
ernance develops in partnership with 
industry, not in opposition to it.
MI could usher in a new era of growth 
and prosperity in the United States, 
fueling significant gains in growth and 
productivity and new opportunities 
throughout our society. Currently, MI in 
the United States is advancing in a policy 
vacuum. The federal government lacks 
a coordinated plan for responding to 
the emergence of MI, risking the emer -
gence of a patchwork of state and local 
regulations that could impede innova -
tion. Other countries have already es -
tablished national strategies to capture 
the benefits of MI, and are aggressively 
pursuing their implementation as they 
race to catch up with the United States. 
Policymakers must clearly articulate the 
values by which MI should be governed, 
and work to incorporate those values 
into the design of MI systems developed 
within the United States. At the same 
time, we need a strategy to ensure that 
the benefits of MI accrue to all, and that 
the risks from MI are responsibly man-
aged. If we wait for a major accident to 
provoke action we are likely to get the 
kind of disruptive and reactive policy-
making that stifles innovation and un -
dermines U.S. leadership.

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
47
ABOUT THE 
AUTHORS
William A. Carter is the deputy director of the Technology Policy Program at CSIS. His research focuses on in -
ternational cyber and technology policy issues, including artificial intelligence, surveillance and privacy, data 
localization, cyber conflict and deterrence, financial-sector cybersecurity, and law enforcement and technolo-
gy, including encryption. He has spoken at events and conferences around the world and participated in Track 
2 dialogues on cyber and technology policy issues with China, Russia, and Australia. Before joining CSIS, he 
worked in the Goldman Sachs Investment Strategy Group, where he performed research and analysis on geo -
politics and the macro economy and produced reports and presentations on international affairs and current 
events and their impact on markets. He previously worked at the Council on Foreign Relations and at Caxton 
Associates, a New York hedge fund. He graduated from New York University with a B.A. in economics.
Emma Kinnucan serves as a lead associate at Booz Allen Hamilton, where she is responsible for developing the 
firm’s machine intelligence (MI) strategy and supporting Booz Allen’s clients in development of their MI strate-
gies. In this role, she works with public, private, and social sector leaders to understand the opportunities and 
challenges in using machine learning, high-performance computing, and other MI technologies to improve 
business and society. In previous roles, she was a counterterrorism analyst at the Department of Defense, a 
strategic cyber security researcher for Fortune 500 executives, and a developer of new products and business 
strategy for a leading private-sector firm. She has been published in the Atlantic and Information Weekly. Kinnu-
can graduated summa cum laude from Northeastern University with a B.S. in criminal justice, political science, 
and international affairs.
Josh Elliot is director of machine intelligence at Booz Allen. He has more than 18 years of experience devel -
oping and executing business strategy, overseeing technical delivery, creating new solutions, and developing 
talent across civil and commercial markets. He has taken on a key role accelerating Booz Allen’s machine in -
telligence work, including artificial intelligence, machine learning, and quantum and deep learning solutions 
tied to our clients’ challenges. He is passionate about driving new and evolving technologies in data science 
and machine intelligence, as well as forging industry partnerships. Previously, Elliot managed technical and 
business development for Booz Allen’s U.S. federal civilian aviation practice. He also co-led the establishment 
of Booz Allen’s IT strategy center of excellence, and currently serves as a mentor to James Madison University’s 
Hack 4 Defense program. Elliot has a B.A. in finance and computer information systems from James Madison 
University and is certified in the governance of enterprise information technology through ISACA.
William Crumpler is a research assistant with the Technology Policy Program at CSIS, where his research 
focuses on cybersecurity policy and the governance of artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. 
He holds a B.S. in materials science and engineering from North Carolina State University.
Kirsten Lloyd is an associate in Booz Allen’s Strategic Innovation Group, where she develops and delivers the 
firm’s machine intelligence strategy service offering. In conjunction with both public and private sector leaders, 
she works to understand the opportunities and challenges associated with using machine intelligence-enabled 
technologies including high-performance computing, machine learning, natural language processing, deep 
learning, etc. Previously, she served as a research analyst identifying new business opportunities by examining 
the intersection of emerging economic, technological, and environmental trends. Kirsten holds a B.A. in global 
studies, with a concentration in latin american studies, and history from the College of William & Mary.

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
48

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
49

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
A 
National 
Machine 
Intelligence 
Strategy 
for the 
United 
States
50

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20036 
202 887 0200 | www.csis.org
8283 Greensboro Dr, 
McLean, VA 22102 
703 902 5000 | www.boozallen.com
