
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
editors
William Reinsch
Scott Miller
A Report of the CSIS Trade Commission on Affirming American Leadership
OCTOBER 2020
authors
Matthew P. Goodman
Dylan Gerstel
Sharpening
America’s
Innovative Edge

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Sharpening
America’s
Innovative Edge
A Report of the CSIS Trade Commission on Affirming American Leadership
OCTOBER 2020
editors
William Reinsch
Scott Miller
authors
Matthew P. Goodman
Dylan Gerstel

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
iii
ABOUT CSIS
About CSIS
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is a bipartisan, nonprofit policy research organization ded-
icated to advancing practical ideas to address the world’s greatest challenges.
Thomas J. Pritzker was named chairman of the CSIS Board of Trustees in 2015, succeeding former U.S. senator
Sam Nunn (D-GA). Founded in 1962, CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, who has served as president and chief exec -
utive officer since 2000.
CSIS’s purpose is to define the future of national security. We are guided by a distinct set of values—nonparti -
sanship, independent thought, innovative thinking, cross-disciplinary scholarship, integrity and professionalism,
and talent development. CSIS’s values work in concert toward the goal of making real-world impact.
CSIS scholars bring their policy expertise, judgment, and robust networks to their research, analysis, and recom -
mendations. We organize conferences, publish, lecture, and make media appearances that aim to increase the knowl-
edge, awareness, and salience of policy issues with relevant stakeholders and the interested public.
CSIS has impact when our research helps to inform the decisionmaking of key policymakers and the thinking of key
influencers. We work toward a vision of a safer and more prosperous world.
CSIS is ranked the number one think tank in the United States as well as the defense and national security center of
excellence for 2016-2018 by the University of Pennsylvania’s “Global Go To Think Tank Index. ”
CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be
solely those of the author(s).
© 2020 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved.
Center for Strategic & International Studies
1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
202-887-0200 | www.csis.org

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
iv
ABOUT THE CSIS TRADE COMMISSION ON AFFIRMING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP
About the CSIS Trade Commission on Affirming
American Leadership
U.S. economic leadership faces pressure at home and abroad. The global institutions built on the back of the post -
war U.S. alliance structure, and the rules and norms they support, were constructed for the twentieth century, not
the twenty-first century. New challengers to the existing system have emerged. Confidence in the international
order is eroding within the United States, as many Americans feel that the benefits of the existing system are not
as widely shared as they once were. A mishandled health pandemic has raised questions about U.S. competence.
As a result of these and other forces, American leadership on the global stage has been seriously eroded. Allies are
beginning to question America’s commitment to the institutions and rules that it enlisted them to craft and up -
hold, and adversaries are seeking to take advantage of these doubts. As history moves toward a pivot point, there
is an urgent need for revitalization and affirmation of American leadership.
The CSIS Commission on Affirming American Leadership was created in the summer of 2019 to develop a series
of recommendations to cement U.S. global leadership in light of these twenty-first century challenges. In a series
of reports, the commission lays out recommendations for the U.S. workforce, U.S. innovation policy, and U.S.
engagement in the international trading system.
Members of the commission are listed below. Each commissioner participated in an individual capacity, not on
behalf of their organizations. Individual members of the commission do not necessarily endorse all of the recom -
mendations in this paper.
Commission Co-Chairs
Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky, Senior International Partner at WilmerHale; former USTR, 1997-2001
Senator William E. Brock, former USTR from 1981-1985; former Secretary of Labor from 1985-1987; U.S. Senator
from Tennessee, 1971-1977; CSIS Counselor and Trustee
Mr. Frederick W . Smith, Chairman and CEO of FedEx Corporation; CSIS Trustee
Commissioners
Dr. Byron Auguste, CEO and Co-Founder, Opportunity@Work
Mr. Ajay Banga, CEO of Mastercard
Dr. Craig Barrett, former Chairman and CEO of Intel Corporation, 1998-2009
Mr. Gary J. Baumgartner, Chairman of GJB Inc.; CSIS International Councillor
Mr. Joshua Bolten, President and CEO of the Business Roundtable; former White House Chief of Staff, 2006-2009
Ms. Joyce Chang, Chair of Global Research, J.P . Morgan
Mr. David Cohen, Partner at WilmerHale; former Deputy Director of the CIA, 2015-2017
Mr. Vincent Mearl (Zippy) Duvall , President of the American Farm Bureau Federation

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
v
ABOUT THE CSIS TRADE COMMISSION ON AFFIRMING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP
Mr. Evan G. Greenberg, Chairman and CEO, Chubb
Ambassador Carla Hills, CEO of Hills & Co.; former USTR, 1989-1993; former Secretary of Housing & Urban Devel-
opment, 1975-1977; CSIS Trustee
Dr. Richard Levin, former President of Yale University, 1993-2013
Mr. W . James McNerney, Jr, Senior Advisor with Clayton, Dubilier & Rice (2016-); former Chairman and CEO of The
Boeing Company (2005-2015); former Chairman and CEO (3M (2000-2005) and former Chairman of the President’s
Export Council (2010-2014); CSIS Trustee
Mr. Henry H. McVey, Partner and Head of Global Macro & Asset Allocation, CIO of KKR Balance Sheet, KKR
Mr. Michael J. Rogers , former U.S. Representative (MI-08), 2001-2015; Chairman of the Permanent Select Com -
mittee on Intelligence, 2011-2015
Ms. Kavita Shukla, Founder and CEO of the FRESHGLOW Co.
Mr. Jay Timmons, President and CEO of the National Association of Manufacturers
Dr. Laura D. Tyson, Distinguished Professor at the Hass School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley; former
U.S. Council of Economic Advisers Chairwomen
Staff Directors
Matthew P . Goodman, Senior Vice President for Economics, CSIS
Scott Miller, Senior Adviser, Abshire-Inamori Leadership Academy, CSIS
William Reinsch, Senior Adviser and Scholl Chair in International Business, CSIS
Executive Director
Grace Hearty, Deputy Director, Economics Program, CSIS

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
vi
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Acknowledgments
Throughout the commission, CSIS scholars received invaluable support and intellectual input from a vast range
of experts and former policymakers, who are listed below. We thank them all for their counsel. All contributors
participated in an individual capacity and not on behalf of the institutions with which they are affiliated.
Grant Aldonas
Douglas M. Bell
Ralph S. Carter
Robert Chiappetta
Wendy Cutler
Elizabeth Economy
Susan Esserman
Gerri Fiala
Orit Frenkel
Jennifer Hillman
Warren Maruyama
Y ancy Molnar
Kevin Nealer
John Neuffer
Michelle O‘Neill
Brian Pomper
Andrew Quinn
Michael Smart
Samantha Smith
David Steel
John Veroneau
The authors of this report would also like to thank the many people at CSIS who have contributed to this commis -
sion’s success, including our CEO, John Hamre, for his strategic direction and direction and guidance; Jonathan
Robison, for his impeccable administrative support and creativity; Jasmine Lim and Megan Zsorey, for their support
with logistics and events; Julia McNerney for her work on both logistics and substance; and our talented colleagues
in the CSIS External Relations department.
This report was made possible through the generous support of the CSIS Strategic Initiatives Fund, as well as individual
contributions from Frederick W . Smith, Gary J. Baumgartner, and W . James McNerney. We are grateful to all of them
for making this project possible.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
vii
CONTENTS
Contents
Executive Summary 1
01 | Introduction 3
02 | Investing in Innovation 5
03 | Protecting Critical Technologies 16
04 | Championing Data Governance 21
05 | Recommendations 25
06 | Conclusion 34
About the Authors and Editors 35

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
But U.S. policymakers have grown complacent, resting on
the success of the Cold War model without maintaining or
modernizing it. National R&D spending as a percentage of
gross domestic product (GDP) has barely grown over the
past few decades, with rising private sector expenditures
offset by declining government funding. 1 Primary and
secondary education outcomes—particularly in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)—have
stagnated despite rising costs. Other countries, notably
China, are rapidly advancing in critical technologies. As a
result, U.S. leadership is in a perilous position.
As the United States emerges from the Covid-19 pan -
demic, policymakers must seize the opportunity to reaf-
firm U.S. technological leadership. To further the discus-
S
ince World War II, the United States has led the
world in developing cutting-edge knowledge and
technology. A dynamic private sector, a skilled
workforce, leading universities, and federal support
for research and development (R&D), reinforced by an
open trade and investment environment, kept Ameri -
ca at the innovation frontier for decades. Technolog -
ical superiority has not only driven higher incomes,
living standards, and life expectancy but has support -
ed national security and buttressed U.S. global leader -
ship. Going forward, U.S. technological prowess will
be indispensable to growth and to solving such crises
as public health emergencies and the threats posed by
climate change.
Executive Summary
00

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
global economy means that there are multiple vec -
tors for sensitive technology and data transfers to ad-
versaries, requiring coordination across policy areas.
As a guiding principle, policymakers should reaffirm
the benefits of open investment, trade, and research
while tailoring control mechanisms to address spe -
cific vulnerabilities, using multilateral action where
possible. In an interagency process, policymakers
should align on top-level objectives and standardize
guidance between various control mechanisms (e.g.
investment screening, export controls, research col -
laboration).
5. Work with allies on multilateral technology con -
trols: Multilateral cooperation is necessary both to
maximize policy effectiveness and minimize negative
spillover effects. U.S. allies and partners share many
similar concerns about national security risks stem -
ming from technology transfer, especially to China,
but are earlier in their reform cycles. Policymakers
should continue to deepen cooperation, including
by establishing an Allied Technology Controls group
that would coordinate various mechanisms for man-
aging technology transfer policy.
6. Adopt national data privacy regulation: If the
United States does not step up in discussions on the
rules, standards, and norms that govern data priva -
cy and digital trade, others will. Beijing and Brussels
have each articulated a data privacy framework. U.S.
states have started to put in place their own systems,
but the federal government has yet to follow suit.
Policymakers should accelerate discussions on a na-
tional privacy framework, with the goal of reaching
an agreement by the end of 2021.
7. Align data governance principles with allies: De-
spite the role of data in driving future economic
growth, there have been no successful international
efforts to set rules directing its collection, processing,
storage, and use. The United States should build on
recent momentum to closer align data governance
frameworks with partners in the Asia-Pacific region
while constructively engaging in plurilateral discus -
sions at the World Trade Organization (WTO).
sion, the Commission on Affiming American Leadership
recommends the following seven elements of a national
technology strategy, organized in three lines of effort:
investing in innovation; protecting critical technologies;
and championing data governance. If adopted, these rec-
ommendations would sharpen the U.S. innovative edge
and position the country for long-term leadership.
1. Recommit to the innovation base: Reaffirming U.S.
leadership begins with reinvesting in the innovation
base: increasing federal funding for R&D, strength -
ening and diversifying a world-class talent pipeline,
encouraging business investment, and building digi-
tal infrastructure. Policymakers should restore federal
R&D funding to its post-War World II average of 1
percent of GDP over the next 5 to 10 years, an increase
of about $100 billion per year. These investments can
help address major societal challenges in climate, de-
fense, and health. In addition, policymakers should
improve STEM education outcomes and workforce
inclusiveness while expanding opportunities for high-
ly skilled individuals to work and remain in the Unit-
ed States.
2. Support key technology categories: Broad invest-
ments in the innovation base are a necessary but not
sufficient element of a national strategy. Targeted fed-
eral action can mobilize resources and catalyze efforts
to develop breakthrough technologies. Washington
should leverage government purchasing power to
create markets for and stimulate investment in ear -
ly-stage, pre-competitive technologies in categories
including artificial intelligence, biotechnology, quan-
tum computing, and robotics.
3. Set global standards: To compete in today’s standards
environment, Washington should encourage and sup-
port the active participation of domestic companies
and experts in the technical process. Policymakers
can do so by advocating for process reforms in stan-
dards-setting groups and facilitating renewed indus-
try participation in technical discussions.
4. Promote whole-of-government technology control
policy: The high degree of interconnectedness in the

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
3
INTRODUCTION
working together in a “triangular alliance. ” Building on a
robust education system, Washington used federal pur-
chasing power and large R&D budgets to create demand
for early-stage technologies and accelerate their develop-
ment. Scientists at national laboratories and universities
generated foundational breakthroughs, which the private
sector then commercialized and deployed at scale.
But U.S. policymakers have grown complacent, resting on
the success of the Cold War model without maintaining
or modernizing it. National R&D spending as a percent-
age of GDP has barely grown over the past few decades,
with rising private sector expenditures offset by declining
government funding.2 Primary and secondary education
outcomes—particularly in STEM fields—have stagnated
S
ince World War II, the United States has led the world
in developing cutting-edge knowledge and technol-
ogy. A dynamic private sector, a skilled workforce,
leading universities, and federal support for R&D, rein-
forced by an open trade and investment environment, kept
America at the innovation frontier for decades. Technolog-
ical superiority has not only driven higher incomes, living
standards, and life expectancy but has also supported na-
tional security and buttressed U.S. global leadership. Going
forward, U.S. technological prowess will be indispensable
to growth and to solving such crises as public health emer-
gencies and the threats posed by climate change.
The United States achieved innovation leadership by lever-
aging the strengths of government, academia, and business
01
Introduction

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
4
INTRODUCTION
despite rising costs. Other countries, notably China, are
rapidly advancing in critical technologies. As a result, U.S.
leadership is in a perilous position.
Although the United States faces fierce competitors, it has
the means to sharpen its innovative edge and inspire a
generation of future scientists and technology entrepre-
neurs. As the United States emerges from the Covid-19
pandemic, policymakers should seize the opportunity
to reaffirm U.S. technological leadership. To further the
discussion, this report outlines three broad areas of focus
for a comprehensive strategy—investing in innovation,
protecting critical technologies, and championing data
governance—and concludes with recommendations and
implementation steps.
Source: “Main Science and Technology Indicators: Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D, ” Organisation for Economic Co-operation, https://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB .

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
5
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
Strengthening the
Innovation Base
U.S. technological breakthroughs have relied on a “trian-
gular alliance” among government, academia, and busi-
ness, each playing to its sectoral strengths. Government
provides essential public goods, including education, in-
frastructure, and funding for basic research. Universities
and national laboratories, supported by public invest -
ment, incubate and develop early-stage, high-risk ideas
and technologies. The private sector then scales up and
commercializes promising projects, as well as conducting
valuable research itself.
The United States spends more than any other coun -
try on R&D. U.S. gross domestic expenditure on R&D
totaled $581 billion in 2018, the highest among ad -
vanced economies and an increase from $361 billion in
2000.3 Other countries, especially China, have ramped
up R&D spending to narrow the gap with the United
States. China’s R&D expenditure growth averaged 17.3
percent annually over 2000–2017, while U.S. growth
averaged 4.3 percent during the same period. 4 U.S.
R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP increased
from 2.6 percent in 2000 to 2.8 percent in 2018, rough -
ly the same level as the 1960s. Over that time, China’s
R&D spending increased from 0.9 percent of GDP to
2.2 percent of GDP , more than doubling. As a result,
Investing in
Innovation
02

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
6
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
the U.S. share of global R&D funding declined from
37 percent in 2000 to 25 percent in 2017. 5 If current
trends remain unchanged, China is on track to be the
Types of R&D Activity
R&D activity is typically grouped into three categories: basic research, applied research, and experi -
mental development. 7
Basic or fundamental research refers to “experimental or theoretical work undertaken primarily to
acquire new knowledge of the underlying foundations of phenomena and observable facts, without
any particular application or use in view. ”
Applied research is “original investigation undertaken in order to acquire new knowledge . . . direct -
ed primarily towards a specific, practical aim or objective. ” Applied research often draws on break -
throughs in basic science, such as Albert Einstein’s work on the general theory of relatively, to create
specific applications, such as the atomic clocks used in Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites. 8
Experimental development refers to “systematic work, drawing on knowledge gained from research
and practical experience and producing additional knowledge, which is directed to producing new
products or processes or to improving existing products or processes. ” Such early-stage development
focuses on translating scientific breakthroughs directly into products or processes, which often leads
to commercialization.
Source: “Main Science and Technology Indicators: Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D, ” Organisation for Economic Co-operation, https://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB.
largest spender on overall R&D, outpacing the United
States within the next decade .6
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017
Japan KoreaU.S. EU China
FIGURE 1 / R&D Expenditure as a Percentage of GDP

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
7
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
The United States maintains a sizeable lead in spending
on basic and applied research, while China leads in de -
velopment expenditures. U.S. national spending on basic
R&D in 2018 amounted to 0.5 percent of GDP , the largest
in absolute terms and trailing only Korea, Israel, and the
Czech Republic relative to GDP , while China’s 2018 basic
R&D expenditure totaled 0.1 percent of GDP .9 Similarly,
in 2018 the United States spent almost double the amount
of China on applied research, although the gap has nar-
rowed in the last two decades. While the United States
leads in research expenditures, China has led in global
spending on experimental development since 2014.10
Measured by outcomes, the United States remains a lead-
ing source of high-quality science and engineering publi-
cations, but other countries are catching up. In 2018, the
United States held the second-largest share (behind Ja -
pan) of “triadic” patent families—those registered in the
European Union, Japan, and the United States.11 While
the U.S. share declined from 28 percent in 2000 to 23 per-
cent in 2017, China’s share of triadic patent families rose
from 0.2 percent in 2000 to 7.6 percent in 2017. Similarly,
while the United States still produces the largest number
of highly cited science and engineering research articles,
China’s share has shot up since 2000.12
Source: “Historical Trends in Federal R&D, ” American Association for the Advancement of Science, https://www.aaas.org/programs/r-d-budget-and-polic-
cy/historical-trends-federal-rd .
Over time, the primary source of U.S. R&D funding
has shifted from the public to the private sector. At the
height of the space race with the Soviet Union in the
1960s, federally funded R&D represented over 1.6 per -
cent of GDP , double the amount of business-funded
R&D and accounting for two-thirds of U.S. R&D in -
vestment.13 By 2017, government funding for all types
of R&D declined to 0.6 percent of GDP , a 60-year low.
The decline is notable, since federal spending is a vital
source of support for the U.S. research enterprise, espe-
cially for fundamental science.14 By contrast, the private
sector funded around 70 percent of U.S. R&D in 2017,
focusing primarily on experimental development and,
to a lesser degree, applied research. This change was
driven by declining defense budgets after the Cold War,
the growing role of business in the national innovation
system, and austerity measures imposed to limit gov -
ernment spending.
Both public and private R&D investment are essen -
tial, but the role of government has been underval -
ued in recent decades. Since World War II, govern -
ment financing has made private enterprise more
effective by financing basic research and supporting
commercialization of resulting invention. 15 Public
FIGURE 2 / U.S. R&D Funding as a Percentage of GDP
1953 1961 1969 1977 1985 1993 2001 2009 2017
0
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Federal R&D as percentage of GDP Total as percentage of GDP

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
8
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
Despite the successful track record of government
R&D investment, sequestration after the 2008–2009
global financial crisis and high-profile failures likely
limited funding agencies’ risk appetite. Massachu -
setts Institute of Technology professors Jonathan
Gruber and Simon Johnson warn that U.S. gov -
ernment R&D funding agencies have become too
risk averse, focusing on achievable projects rather
than ambitious projects that offer potential break -
throughs. 20 A 2013 review observed that recent Na -
tional Institutes of Health grants were scored based
more on “doability” than innovation. The study
concluded that agencies had a stronger preference
to fund “doable” research, an inclination which in -
creased in times of budget cuts or sequestration,
when they faced greater pressure to report results to
preserve limited funding. 21
Beyond increased federal R&D funding, policymak -
ers can promote private innovation through structur -
al tax and infrastructure policy. U.S. R&D tax credits
amount to 0.07 percent of GDP , behind the Organi -
sation for Economic Co-operation and Development
The Bayh-Dole Act
The Patent and Trademark Law Amendments
Act of 1980, known as the Bayh-Dole Act,
changed the landscape of R&D by allowing
small businesses and non-profit institutions,
including universities, to retain certain pat -
ent rights on inventions produced with fed -
eral financial assistance. 18 Prior to the legisla -
tion, researchers using federal funding were
obliged to assign patent ownership of any
breakthroughs to the government. The act led
to a surge in university patenting, with activity
increasing an estimated 10-fold between 1980
and 1999.19
Source: “Historical Trends in Federal R&D, ” American Association for the
Advancement of Science, https://www.aaas.org/programs/r-d-budget-
and-policy/historical-trends-federal-rd .
spending can “crowd in” private investment, and one
study found that every federal dollar spent on R&D
spurs an additional 30 cents of business R&D. 16 Gov-
ernment investments typically support higher-risk
projects that may not have clear market viability
and which businesses are unwilling to pursue alone.
Businesses primarily focus on “safer” developmental
R&D to bringing promising ideas—including those
developed through federally funded research—to
market, which has lower risk but is less likely to re -
sult in transformational breakthroughs usually asso -
ciated with basic research. Notably, federally funded
research projects, often in close collaboration with
universities, developed the foundational knowledge
behind the internet, advanced artificial intelligence
(AI) algorithms, GPS, and Google’s search algorithm,
among many other technologies. 17
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1953 1969 1985 2001 2017
PERCENT OF U.S. R&D FUNDING
Federal Industry Other
FIGURE 3 / U.S.R&D Funding by Source,
1953-2017

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
9
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
economic gaps. Out of 35 advanced economies, the
United States spent the fourth-most on primary and
secondary education per student in 2018 but only
achieved average rankings on science and math as -
sessments. 29 Data show that persistent achievement
gaps by racial and socioeconomic status in the United
States expand as students get older. In a national co -
hort of students, the mathematics score gap between
those of high and low socioeconomic backgrounds
rose from 9 points in kindergarten to 29 points in
eighth grade. Gaps between white and Black or His -
panic students showed similar patterns. 30 Recent
studies have shown that lockdowns to contain the
spread of Covid-19 have led to learning loss among
students and likely widened racial and economic gaps
in outcomes, underscoring the urgency for more eq -
uitable primary education opportunities. 31
Special attention must be paid to attracting and re -
taining more women and underrepresented minori -
ties in STEM fields. Women are 52 percent of the U.S.
population but in 2017 held only 29 percent of S&E
jobs in the United States, compared with 22 percent
in 1995. This anemic progress is especially evident in
computer and mathematical sciences, where the pro -
portion of women declined from 31 percent in 1993
to 27 percent in 2017. 32 Underrepresented minorities
from the Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous communi -
ties account for an even smaller share of S&E jobs,
holding 13.3 percent of occupations in 2017 despite
representing 28 percent of the population. 33 While
notable progress has been made since the 1990s—
the percentage of underrepresented minorities in
S&E occupations more than doubled from 1995 to
2017—more action is necessary. In addition to struc -
tural factors, both women and underrepresented mi -
norities in S&E fields generally receive lower salaries
than male and white or Asian counterparts. Although
direct salary comparison is difficult, the National
Science Foundation recently concluded, “Women’s
salary differentials remain at all degree levels after
adjustments for education, employment, demograph -
ic, and other characteristics. ” 34
(OECD) median of 0.11 percent. 22 In 2018, the Unit -
ed States ranked 26th out of 36 OECD countries in
the value of R&D tax incentives. 23 The Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act of 2017 curtailed some existing benefits by
prohibiting companies from immediately deducting
R&D expenses and instead requiring amortization
over five years. Once implemented in 2022, the Unit -
ed States would be the only advanced economy re -
quiring the amortization of R&D expenditures, and
Ernst and Y oung estimates the change could reduce
R&D by $71 billion over 10 years. 24 In digital infra -
structure, the United States ranked 4th among OECD
countries in mobile broadband penetration rates
in 2019 but only 18th in fixed broadband penetra -
tion.25 Beneath the headline numbers, there remains
a significant digital divide, with a 2019 Pew survey
reporting that only two-thirds of rural adults had a
home broadband connection, 12 percentage points
lower than urban adults. 26
The Importance of
Human Capital
The U.S. innovation system relies on training and
attracting the best minds in the world. As of 2016,
the United States awarded the most science and en -
gineering (S&E) doctoral degrees of any country .27
However, as with general R&D spending, other coun -
tries are catching up. In 2015, China awarded 34,000
S&E doctoral degrees (up from under 8,000 in 2000),
compared to 40,000 in the United States, and has sur -
passed the United States in annual doctoral degrees
awarded in natural sciences and engineering since
2007.28 A comprehensive innovation strategy must
focus on both improving educational outcomes and
opportunities at home, especially in STEM fields, and
continuing to attract foreign talent.
Despite relatively high levels of education spending
compared to other advanced economies, U.S. STEM
outcomes are average and contain racial and socio -

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
10
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
To complement domestic talent, the United States
attracts highly skilled international students, scien -
tists, and entrepreneurs. 35 Without foreign students,
the United States would lag far behind China in S&E
doctoral degrees awarded. Foreign students are over -
represented in science and engineering fields, and
about a third of U.S. S&E doctoral degrees conferred
in 2017 were awarded to temporary visa holders.
Concerns about foreign students leaving the coun -
try after their education are exaggerated. As of 2017,
roughly two-thirds of U.S. S&E PhD recipients with
temporary visas stayed in the country for at least five
years after graduating, including 90 percent of stu -
dents from China. 36
It is difficult to overstate the importance of highly
skilled immigrants for U.S. technological leadership.
Although only 18 percent of the U.S. population is
foreign born, 30 percent of workers in S&E occupa -
tions are foreign born, with higher numbers in engi -
neering and computer science. 37 From 1901 to 2019,
immigrants accounted for 35 percent (105 of 302) of
the Nobel Prizes in chemistry, medicine, and phys -
ics won by U.S. citizens. 38 The importance of foreign
talent is especially evident in emerging technologies.
Source: Beethika Khan, Carol Robbins, and Abigail Okrent, The State of Science and Engineering 2020 (Alexandria, VA:
National Science Foundation Science & Engineering Indicators, January 15, 2020), https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20201/
global-r-d.
29
13
6 8
52
17
8 9
52
28
12
16
0
10
20
30
40
50
Women Underrepresented Minorities Black or African American Hispanic or Latino
All S&E Occupations All Occupations U.S. Residential Population (21 and older)
FIGURE 4 / Representation Share in S&E Occupations
According to a June 2020 report from the Macro
Polo think tank, 59 percent of the world’s top-tier
AI researchers work in the United States, but only
one-third of those had received their undergraduate
degree in the United States. 39 First- and second-gen -
eration immigrants have helped launch 60 percent of
the most valuable U.S. technology companies, and an
October 2018 study found that 50 of the 91 U.S. “uni -
corn” tech startups—those valued above $1 billion—
had at least one founder who was an immigrant. 40 As
discussed in detail in the workforce chapter of this
report, attracting and retaining world-class human
capital is essential for technological leadership, and
the immigration system should reflect that reality
while mitigating potential security risks. Actions to
exclude broad groups of foreign researchers will only
hamstring U.S. scientific development. 41
Unfortunately, barriers in the national immigration
system make it hard for talent to stay, which puts
the United States at a competitive disadvantage. The
H-1B visa program—the primary means for U.S.
companies to attract high-skilled immigrants—is
oversubscribed. In 2019, 105,000 more H-1B appli -
cations were submitted beyond the 85,000 statutory

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
11
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
limit. The denial rate for initial H-1B visas reached
29 percent in the first two quarters of FY 2020, up
from 6 percent in FY 2015 and 13 percent in FY
2017.42 Similarly, foreign graduate students at U.S.
Source: “H-1B Denial Rates Through the Second Quarter of FY 2020, ” National Foundation for American Policy, August 2020, https://nfap.com/wp-cont-
tent/uploads/2020/08/H-1B-Denial-Rates-Analysis-Through-The-Second-Quarter-Of-FY-2020.NFAP-Policy-Brief.August-2020.pdf .
universities face barriers to obtaining full-time work
authorization. A 2015 study found that 90 percent of
foreign science and engineering doctorate recipients
pursuing non-academic careers wanted to stay in the
United States to work but only 50 percent were able
to do so.43
In contrast with the United States, other countries
seek to attract foreign talent. From 2013 to 2015,
Canada and Australia admitted 9 and 11 times as
many immigrants, respectively, than the United
States, as a share of their overall population, through
high-skilled visa programs. 44 China has many nation -
al and local programs to attract talent, including the
flagship Thousand Talents Program. 45
Targeted Federal Support
Broad federal investments in research and STEM ed -
ucation are necessary to sharpen America’s innova -
tive edge and address societal challenges, including
climate change. In certain cases, critical technology
sectors may merit additional government support,
such as demand creation through federal purchasing
Source: “The Global AI Talent Tracker, ” Macro Polo, https://macropolo.
org/digital-projects/the-global-ai-talent-tracker/ .
U.S.
31%
China
27%
India
11%
Europe
11%
Other
20%
FIGURE 5 / Top U.S. AI Talent by Country of
Origin
0
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
FY2009 FY2010 FY2011 FY2012 FY2013 FY2014 FY2015 FY2016 FY2017 FY2018 FY2019 FY2020
FIGURE 6 / Denial Rate for H-1B Petitions for Initial Employment

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
12
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
and closer cooperation with industry on applied re -
search and early-stage development.
Despite recent distaste for government intervention in
private markets, Washington has a successful history of
supporting key industries.46 Since World War II, the gov-
ernment has used procurement and large R&D budgets
to harness market forces and accelerate development of
cutting-edge technologies. Federal investment was inte-
gral to foundational inventions, including the internet,
satellites, supercomputing, and the components of smart
phones. Initial federal investment and research contracts
awarded to Stanford University in the 1950s and 1960s
helped build Silicon Valley, just as the Apollo and Min-
uteman programs drove the growth of the semiconductor
industry.47 Operation Warp Speed, the $9.5 billion U.S.
government initiative to deliver 300 million doses of a
Covid-19 vaccine by January 2021, is a current-day test
of the continued effectiveness of public-private cooper-
ation.48 If successful, the initiative will develop a vaccine
in record time through robust public-private cooperation
backed by significant federal investment.
Many successful government initiatives leveraged mas-
sive federal purchasing power to generate demand in
early-stage technologies and support the application of
basic research. In the 1950s and 1960s, the Department
of Defense and space program were essential customers
for emerging technologies, including advanced comput-
ers, materials, and semiconductors. For example, U.S.
government purchases accounted for all U.S. sales of
integrated circuits from their invention in 1958 through
1963.49 Rather than explicitly subsidize individual com-
panies, U.S. government spending created consistent,
large demand signals that generated market incentives
for technological development.
Innovation Strategy for 2030
In response to today’s most pressing challenges—a
global pandemic, climate change, and the rise of eco -
nomic competitors—prominent U.S. policymakers
on both sides of the aisle, as well as business lead -
ers, have called for more active government efforts
to boost innovation. 50 Federal funding for basic re -
search, education, and infrastructure is essential but
not sufficient to ensure the United States strengthens
its technological edge. To supplement broad invest -
ment, U.S. policymakers should consider a proactive
and targeted innovation strategy to support devel -
opment of critical technologies through demand in -
centives and enhanced public-private partnerships.
An innovation strategy should focus on emerging
technologies , including AI, quantum computing, and
semiconductors, along with climate adaptation and
advanced manufacturing where relevant.
On the demand side, federal purchasing can create
markets for early-stage technologies with insufficient
private demand. This helps stimulate investment and
production using market mechanisms, rather than
“picking winners” among individual companies or
technologies. Further, a clear federal market allows
the private sector to scale and overcome initial cost
structures too immature to permit commercial via -
bility. Critically, federal purchasing will help bridge
the gap between basic research and commercializa -
tion to ensure the United States translates its lead in
basic R&D to market results. Federal purcahsing can
encourage not only product innovation but also pro -
cess innovation through the accumulation of deep
technical knowledge associated with advanced man -
ufacturing. Such support is especially important to
offset subsidized international competitors in tech -
nology categories with significant first-mover ad -
vantages or winner-take-all biases. 51 As technologies
reach scale, private actors will eventually replace the
government as the consumer, creating off-ramps for
federal spending.
On the supply side, Washington should rationalize
regulatory processes to encourage innovation in and
production of emerging technologies. The Global In -
novation Index ranks the United States 16th in regu -
latory quality, based on a World Bank survey of “ per-
ceptions of the ability of the government to formulate
and implement sound policies and regulations that
permit and promote private-sector development .”52

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
13
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
In many cases, national regulators lag behind tech -
nological development. This results in a patchwork
of state regulations that can slow the roll-out of
emerging technologies such as autonomous vehicles
and drones. 53 Similarly, the lack of a federal data pri -
vacy and security framework has left states to enact
individual legislation, creating unnecessary costs for
companies to comply with different provisions and
regulatory complexity. The lack of federal U.S. reg -
ulation cedes competitive advantage to companies
from countries with unified guidelines.
Public-private partnerships help bridge demand- and
supply-side incentives and maximize government re -
sources. Enhanced cooperation can build on several
recently launched initiatives. The Quantum Econom -
ic Development Consortium (QED-C), established in
2018, seeks to bring together diverse stakeholders to
grow the U.S. quantum industry. 54 In August 2020,
the Trump administration announced a $1 billion in -
vestment to establish 12 AI and quantum information
science R&D institues, which would build collabora -
tive research teams across science and engineering
disciplines. 55 Future partnerships should focus on
pre-competitive technologies where firms have an in -
centive to cooperate, not compete, and benefit from
shared innovation. 56
SEMATECH: Successful
Public-Private Cooperation
In the 1980s, the U.S. semiconductor industry faced intense competition from Japanese companies
producing higher-quality chips, in part due to Japanese government support. In response, Washington
and U.S. semiconductor producers launched several initiatives to revive the industry, most notably the
SEMATECH (short for “semiconductor manufacturing technology”) R&D consortium. SEMATECH
brought together 14 U.S. corporate members with leading universities and national laboratories to ratio -
nalize supply chains, share know-how, and collaborate to reduce product costs and defects. SEMATECH
was designed as a temporary, five-year project with equal funding from the Department of Defense and
industry.57 To comply with anti-trust law, SEMATECH was explicitly barred from manufacturing chips for
sale and focused instead on generic technology and development processes. 58
Despite initial friction within SEMATECH between chip designers and equipment manufacturers, U.S.
semiconductor manufacturers improved productivity and achieved technical goals. Aided by the emer -
gence of the Korean semiconductor industry, U.S. equipment suppliers achieved market share parity with
Japanese competitors by 1992. More broadly, SEMATECH helped rally an industry under considerable
pressure from Japanese competitors that had their government’s support, accelerated U.S. technologi -
cal advances, and established institutional best practices and standards with long-term significance. 59 A
National Academies’ study attributed SEMATECH’s success to several factors, especially private sector
commitment to the effort, buy-in of top scientists and engineers, and agreement on technology roadmaps
between chip designers and equipment manufacturers. 60

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
14
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
Guardrails are necessary to ensure that federal programs
have clear missions, build cooperation with the private
sector, and maintain flexibility to adapt to changing
market conditions. Generally, government purchas -
ing is a more effective tool than subsidies and should
support early-stage technology categories, not specific
companies or technologies. Federal investments should
focus on riskier projects to crowd-in private funding.
Some failures will be inevitable, but they should be seen
as a reflection of a program’s ambition, not a defect or
cause for policy reversal. Policymakers crafting such in-
vestments should have a baseline technical understand-
ing of the U.S. competitive position in global markets.
Similarly, supporting key technology categories should
not serve as a pretext to broadly restrict international
trade or investment beyond narrow national securi -
ty-related concerns (discussed in Chapter 2). Any U.S.
innovation strategy should adhere to agreed-upon inter-
national rules, notably the WTO’s Agreement on Subsi-
dies and Countervailing Measures and the Government
Procurement Agreement. 61 Policies that violate such
conventions will undermine efforts to discipline unfair
trading practices and will alienate allies and partners.
The Covid-19 pandemic has elevated debates about the
role of government in securing supply chains and crit -
ical national functions. When assessing this question,
U.S. policymakers should consider the narrow set of
critical functions that require a domestic supply base,
what industries can leverage supply chains across allied
countries, and whether excessive concentration for cer-
tain products or inputs exists and creates vulnerabilities.
Washington has rightly increased direct support for
production of critical medical equipment and vaccines.
However, other proposals risk doing more harm than
good, such as expansive “Buy American” rules that re -
quire federal agencies to purchase medical supplies and
other mature technologies made in the United States. 62
Such preferential policies could reinforce reliance on
limited sources of supply, which will increase vulner -
ability to “black swan” events such as natural disasters
or pandemics. In addition, while they may marginally
reduce foreign dependence, they could also raise prod -
uct costs and violate international agreements. Efforts to
stockpile emergency equipment, create emergency pro-
duction plans with allies and partners, and learn from
public health response successes and failures will better
position the United States to lead global responses to fu-
ture pandemics.
Source: Semiconductor Industry Association, 2019 SIA Factbook (Washington, DC: 2019), https://www.semiconductors.org/the-2019-sia-factbook-your-
top-source-for-semiconductor-industry-data/ ; Chart reproduced with permission.
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014 2018
U.S. EuropeJapan Korea Taiwan China
FIGURE 7 / Global Semiconductor Market Share, 1982-2019

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
15
INVESTING IN INNOVATION
China has been a particular challenge in this space. Chi-
nese companies’ expanded market share in emerging tech-
nologies, supported by conscious government policy, has
brought Beijing increased representation in standard-set-
ting bodies. According to a U.S.-China Business Council
report, from 2011 to 2020, China’s secretariat positions
in the technical committees or subcommittees increased
by 73 percent in the International Standardization Orga-
nization. The number of Chinese companies participat-
ing as voting members in the Third Generation Partner-
ship Project, a fifth-generation (5G) telecommunications
standards-setting group, doubled in recent years to 110 in
January 2020, more than double the 54 U.S. voting mem-
bers.64 Chinese companies are very active in certain stan-
dards bodies, and in December 2019, the Financial Times
reported that only Chinese companies (and none from any
other countries) had submitted proposals for surveillance
technology standards to the International Telecommuni-
cations Union since 2016.65
Experts debate whether China’s increased participation
in standards-setting processes threatens U.S. interests. A
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission
report warned that Beijing “is actively attempting to in-
fluence international technical standards for the IoT [In-
ternet of Things] that would benefit Chinese companies
at the expense of U.S. and other foreign counterparts. ”66
Chinese companies have been criticized for “flooding the
zone” with proposals to create confusion and exhaustion in
technical working groups. Chinese companies are report-
edly trying to influence standards-setting bodies to adopt
protocols friendly to state control of technology, raising
security as well as economic concerns.67 However, others
maintain that standards-setting decisions are ultimately
technical in nature and benefit from constructive Chinese
cooperation.68 Further, discouraging Chinese participation
in standards-setting groups could limit the number of in-
ternational standards adopted in China, leading to a more
fragmented world. The United States should not oppose
China’s productive participation in international stan -
dards-setting processes. Instead, Washington should urge
and support renewed active participation in the techni-
cal process by domestic companies and experts.
Setting Global Standards
Standards are an essential, if often underappreciated,
aspect of technology innovation. Standards codify de -
sign and safety elements for products, procedures, and
personnel. Standards underpin technological develop -
ment and facilitate commercialization of a wide range
of activities, such as interoperability of telecommunica-
tions equipment. To ensure smooth global trade, stan -
dards are often set by international organizations with
membership from companies or national governments.
Standards organizations help determine whose tech -
nology is used—leading to highly profitable licensing
fees and significant competitive advantage for winning
companies—and how it is used. Once standards are es-
tablished, they are difficult to uproot, which locks in ad-
vantages for companies whose preferences are adopted.
Many U.S. semiconductor giants established their dom-
inant positions in part by ensuring their chip standards
were adopted.
The U.S. approach to standards has typically been fron
the bottom up, with industry taking the lead in setting
standards based on technical knowledge and market
demands and government taking a largely hands-off
approach. In contrast, China and the European Union
have taken a more state-led approach to standard-set -
ting, more tightly controlling standard setting through
government-blessed bodies and supporting active in -
dustry participation in standards-setting groups. Rec -
ognizing the importance of standards, in 2020 Beijing’s
formalized its “China Standards 2035” plan to set global
rules in emerging technologies, including those listed in
the “Made in China 2025” industrial strategy.63
The current approach worked well in an era when U.S.
companies dominated critical technologies, but market
realities have changed and competitors have taken more
strategic approaches. The U.S. government needs to de-
velop and implement proactive strategies to push back
on this state-led approach and support U.S.-developed
standards and the private-sector-led standards system.

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
16
PROTECTING CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES
• The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS), to screen foreign investment in and
acquisitions of U.S. companies;
• Export controls, to regulate transactions with foreign
buyers, including “deemed” exports of knowledge;
• Visa policies, to regulate who can enter the country;
• Economic sanctions, to regulate U.S. private sector
interactions with foreign entities; and
• Counterespionage, to thwart cybertheft and oth -
er illegal transfer of intellectual property (IP) and
trade secrets.
At the multilateral level, there are several formal
mechanisms to coordinate export controls: the Aus -
W
hile investing in innovation, policymak -
ers should seek to ensure that sensitive
technology developed by that investment
does not flow to adversaries. The United States has
long maintained a relatively open trade, investment,
and research environment. Successive U.S. adminis -
trations since World War II have sought to liberalize
economic relations with other countries under the
assumption that lower barriers would support U.S.
workers, businesses, and scientific leadership. To
mitigate leakage of critical technology, Washington
adopted an array of tailored controls on the flow of
products or information directly related to national
security, including 69:
Protecting Critical
Technologies
03

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
17
PROTECTING CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES
Beijing’s “Made in China 2025” industrial plan to
support domestic champions could reduce U.S. chip
companies’ global market share by 2 to 5 percentage
points. 71 However, the report warned that broad U.S.
restrictions on technology exports to China could
cause far more immediate damage. Partial unilateral
restrictions on sales to Chinese customers could cost
U.S. companies 8 percentage points of global market
share, and total restrictions on sales to China could
cost them 16 percentage points, as Beijing turned
to other suppliers and retaliated against American
firms. As a result, the report concludes that a poor -
ly executed control strategy could cede global semi -
conductor leadership to South Korea in the medium
term and China in the long term.
Strengthening Existing
Control Systems
During the Trump administration, Washington has
strengthened existing technology control mecha -
nisms. The Foreign Investment Risk Review Modern -
ization Act of 2018 (FIRRMA), signed by President
Trump in August 2018, expands the jurisdiction of
CFIUS screening to “non-passive, non-controlling”
investments in “critical technology” companies, in -
cluding certain types of venture capital investment. 72
Since 2016, Chinese foreign direct investment in the
United States has collapsed, primarily as a result of
Beijing’s stricter capital controls but also due to a
tougher U.S. regulatory environment for advanced
technology activity. 73 One study found that the CFI -
US clearance rate of transactions related to China
from 2017 to February 2020 is roughly 60 percent,
down from more than 95 percent during the Obama
administration. 74 Most of the rejected deals were in
the technology sector, while non-technology transac -
tions cleared at Obama-era levels.
In parallel with FIRRMA, Congress passed the Export
Control Reform Act (ECRA) to expand export restric -
tralia Group, which controls items useful for chemical
or biological warfare; the Missile Technology Control
Regime; the Nuclear Suppliers Group; and the Was -
senaar Arrangement, which controls dual-use goods
and technology.
These Cold War-era mechanisms worked well when
the world was divided into two separate political
blocs. The rise of China and other economic compet -
itors has highlighted limitations of the U.S. control sys-
tem. An influential 2017 report from the Department
of Defense’s Defense Innovation Unit Experimental
(DIUx) warned that China was “executing a multi-de -
cade plan to transfer [critical] technology” through
legal and illegal means. The report demonstrated that
Beijing exploited gaps in U.S. regulations to transfer
knowledge through acquisitions of majority or par -
tial stakes in U.S. companies, venture capital invest -
ment, purchases of non-controlled items, and talent
recruitment programs. 70 Further, the report detailed
that China engaged in rampant IP theft and commer -
cial espionage by cyber and traditional means.
While the DIUx report and other strategic planning
documents identified gaps in the U.S. technology
control system, globalized commerce and supply
chains have made it complicated to simply limit eco -
nomic interactions with competitors. China is simul -
taneously a competitor in key technologies, a sup -
plier of product inputs, and a vital market for U.S.
companies, which rely on revenue earned in China
to fund their R&D spending. Striking the correct bal -
ance between control and openness is best understood
as a trade-off within national security, not just between
national security and economics. Decisions to limit
openness could limit sensitive technology leakage in
the short term, but overcontrol will hurt domestic in -
dustry by limiting sales and encouraging adversaries
to develop their own competitors.
A March 2020 study from the Boston Consulting
Group and the Semiconductor Industry Association
illustrates the difficulty of severing ties with China in
the semiconductor sector. The paper estimated that

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
18
PROTECTING CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES
significantly disrupt U.S. innovation leadership. Com -
merce should work closely with industry and the aca -
demic research community to assess the implications of
these expansions, clarify how they will be applied, and
ensure they best address the specific national security
risks of concern without unduly undermining U.S. com-
petitiveness and innovation leadership.
At the agency level, the United States formalized efforts
to combat cyber theft and review foreign research col -
laboration. In 2018, the Department of Justice (DOJ)
launched its China Initiative, an agency-wide effort to
prosecute cases of economic espionage, trade secret
theft, hacking, and other economic crimes originating
from China.80 As of February 2020, the China Initiative
had led to around 40 arrests. 81 However, cybertheft re -
mains a significant problem, and it remains unclear how
effective DOJ efforts have been to curtail it.
Science funding agencies have taken steps to increase
scrutiny of foreign research linkages and conflicts of
interest while reaffirming the benefits of open collab -
oration on basic research. Their efforts have generally
focused on four areas: (1) improving enforcement of
existing disclosure requirements; (2) preserving the
confidentiality of the peer review process; (3) enforcing
IP protection; and (4) putting restrictions on U.S. gov -
ernment researchers affiliated with foreign recruitment
programs.82 Although initial procedural changes were
tions to “emerging” and “foundational” technologies es-
sential to U.S. national security. ECRA established guid-
ing principles for the use of export controls, including
taking action “only after full consideration of the impact
on the economy of the United States” and tailoring na -
tional security controls on “core technologies and other
items that are capable of being used to pose a serious na-
tional security threat to the United States. ”75 ECRA also
instructs the United States to coordinate export controls
with multilateral export control regimes and recognizes
that “export controls applied unilaterally to items widely
available from foreign sources generally are less effective
in preventing end-users from acquiring those items. ”76
ECRA requires the Department of Commerce, through
the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), to identify
products in each category through an interagency pro -
cess in consultation with the private sector. While BIS
published a broad list of 14 emerging technology cate -
gories subject to control, including biotechnology and
artificial intelligence, final rules published thus far have
been limited to narrow applications. 77 BIS has also re -
leased a request for comments on proposed rulemak -
ing regarding controls on foundational technologies. 78
In addition to developing emerging and foundational
technology control lists, BIS announced a slew of rules
to reform existing export control regimes in spring 2020
to restrict advanced semiconductor sales to Huawei and
its affiliates.79 These expansions, applied broadly, could
Source: “China Investment Monitor, ” Rhodium Group, https://rhg.com/impact/china-investment-monitor/ .
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Foreign Direct Investment Venture Capital
USD BILLIONS
FIGURE 8 / Chinese Investment Flows to the United States

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
19
PROTECTING CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES
ed the arrangement because of the high costs of local -
izing high-value production. Unlike previous challeng-
ers, Beijing has the intent and resources to indigenously
innovate and develop advanced technologies, demand-
ing a rethink of previous technology control strategy.
As a guiding principle, policymakers should reaffirm
the benefits of open investment, trade, and research
while tailoring control mechanisms to address specific
vulnerabilities, using multilateral action where possible,
as stipulated in ECRA. New restrictions on technology
transfer—either for investment, export controls, or for-
eign research collaboration—should reflect three basic
criteria. First, they must establish that the technology
is essential to national security. Second, they must be
effective. This means the United States should not act
unilaterally without considering the presence of alter -
native foreign suppliers of a technology. A multilateral
approach leverages relationships to increase efficacy, re-
duce enforcement costs, and prevent technology leak -
age to countries of concern. Finally, they should consult
with industry and consider the costs of specific controls
on U.S. economic and innovation leadership before
taking action. Policymakers should ensure transpar -
ent due process procedures to incorporate stakeholder
perspectives, such as through public comment periods,
and continuously evaluate in consultation with industry
whether existing controls are too broad or too narrow.
An effective approach would limit the sale of technol -
ogies essential to national security to certain end-users
without cutting off broader economic linkages. Thus
far, U.S. reforms have commendably balanced concerns
of too much openness and overcontrol. Policymakers
should continue working with experts to ensure effec -
tive implementation of FIRRMA and ECRA. BIS has
reconstituted its technical advisory committee to assist
with identifying emerging and foundational technolo -
gies, and OSTP has opened channels of communication
with academia to craft new guidelines on foreign re -
search collaboration while affirming NSDD-189.
In parallel to domestic reforms, policymakers should
strengthen multilateral channels for coordination of
uncoordinated, the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP) announced a Joint Commit-
tee on Research Environments in May 2019 to bring a
“whole of government” approach to ensuring research
integrity.83 The National Institutes of Health has been
especially vigilant: since 2018, the agency has dismissed
54 scientists as a result of violating disclosure rules, of -
ten by not reporting foreign research funding. In 93
percent of cases of concern, the hidden funding came
from a Chinese institution.84
As with investment restrictions and export controls,
closer scrutiny of foreign researchers involves trade-
offs. Universities and other institutions have often
been too lax in enforcing funding disclosure guide -
lines, IP protections, and ethics rules due to an under -
appreciation of the risks posed by Chinese technology
acquisition grand strategy. Still, overcorrecting could
further jeopardize the U.S. research enterprise, which
relies heavily on international collaboration. In 2018,
39 percent of U.S. science and engineering articles
were developed with foreign scholars, up from 19 per -
cent in 2000. U.S. scientists often work with Chinese
researchers, and 26 percent of U.S. internationally
coauthored articles in 2018 had a Chinese coauthor,
the largest share of any country. 85 In 1985, the Reagan
administration affirmed the value of open cooperation
on fundamental research with National Security Deci -
sion Direction 189 (NSDD-189), which all future ad -
ministrations subsequently endorsed. 86
A New Approach to
Managing Technology
Transfer
For decades, the United States had allowed sales of crit-
ical, dual-use technologies to competitors, provided
the products were at least a generation outdated. This
approach allowed U.S. companies to maintain glob -
al market share while preserving their technological
leadership. Purchasing countries begrudgingly tolerat -

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
20
PROTECTING CRITICAL TECHNOLOGIES
technology control policies. Without cooperation with
allies, the United States will not achieve its national se -
curity objectives and will risk undermining the com -
petitiveness of U.S. companies, to the benefit of foreign
companies, including Chinese firms. Washington has
tried to convince allies to adopt stricter technology con-
trol policies, with some success. 87 Several key partners,
including Germany and Japan, have expanded the ju -
risdiction of their foreign investment screening mech -
anisms, following the U.S. example. 88 Major education
exporters, especially Australia, have increased scrutiny
of foreign research collaborations.89 Multilateral mecha-
nisms have made some progress on defining export con-
trols for emerging technologies, but consensus has been
limited to niche applications, and the United States has
taken unilateral action on more prevalent technologies.90
Going forward, Washington should work with its allies
to develop a coordinated control system across the rele-
vant policy mechanisms. In doing so, the United States
should accept some flexibility from allies and partners
in their policy design. Unfortunately, the frequent use or
threat of U.S. sanctions has antagonized our allies, lead-
ing them to develop ways to get around these sanctions
and limiting avenues for cooperation.
As a general rule, policymakers should use mechanisms
that control technology transfer to support national se-
curity objectives. Keeping the scope of such tools narrow
will facilitate multilateral cooperation and minimize
disruptive impacts to the domestic economy and U.S.
commercial sector. In certain cases, however, it may be
appropriate to use export controls alongside sanctions
to achieve foreign policy goals, as authorized under the
Export Administration Act.91 Foreign policy-based ex -
port controls should continue to be subject to annual
review to ensure they are used judiciously.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
21
CHAMPIONING DATA GOVERNANCE
Why Data Governance
Matters
Data has been called the “oil of the digital era” for its
role as a driver of future economic growth and indus -
try transformation. 92 The McKinsey Global Institute
estimates that the value of cross-border data flows sur -
passed the impact of global goods trade in 2014, add -
ing $2.8 trillion to global GDP .93 The rollout of 5G tele-
S
harpening the U.S. innovative edge requires en -
gagement in global digital rulemaking to set a
foundation for sustained leadership. It is not
enough to invest at home and protect sensitive technol-
ogies. If America does not step up in discussions on the
rules, standards, and norms that govern data privacy
and digital trade, others will. This could create a bal -
kanized world with competing governance regimes that
disadvantage U.S. companies and the U.S. economy in a
vital growth industry.
Championing Data
Governance
04

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
22
CHAMPIONING DATA GOVERNANCE
and control of data, supported by China; and relatively
free-market systems, found at the U.S. federal level.
The European Union has pioneered a regulatory regime
that seeks to enhance personal privacy rights and limit
the market power of large firms. The landmark Gen -
eral Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which came
into effect in May 2018, establishes the principle that
ownership of personal data remains with an individu -
al, not with collectors or processors. 98 From this prin -
ciple, GDPR requires companies to obtain user con -
sent with “clear and plain language” before collecting
or processing personal data and introduces a right for
individuals to have data erased. Notably, GDPR impos-
es obligations on all companies that collect data relat -
ed to people living in the European Union, even those
headquartered outside the bloc. 99 GDPR authorizes
cross-border data transfers for third countries with
equivalent protections, and the European Commis -
sion conducts periodic adequacy assessments of other
regimes to ensure EU rules are respected. 100 Alongside
GDPR, European authorities have taken aggressive
steps to penalize large (often American) tech giants.
Since 2016, the European Commission has fined Goo -
gle €8.2 billion ($8.9 billion) for violating anti-trust
regulations.101 Major European countries, including
France and the United Kingdom, are threatening to
impose digital services taxes on revenues deemed to
have been generated domestically by all digital compa -
nies, irrespective of where they are based. 102
China has long used a wide-ranging censorship regime,
dubbed “the Great Firewall, ” to closely regulate inter -
net content and access. Recently, Beijing has increased
efforts to assert state control over the flow of online
information while establishing some modest limits on
the sale of personal data. The 2017 Cybersecurity Law
establishes greater data localization requirements for
“critical information infrastructure operators” but also
bans online services providers from selling personal
data without consent. However, the 2017 National In -
telligence Law stipulates “any organization or citizen
shall support, assist, and cooperate with state intelli -
gence work according to law, ” enabling the state to ac-
communications networks will accelerate the number
of devices connected to the internet, which could gen -
erate $4—11 trillion in annual economic gains. 94 Cisco
estimates that the number of devices connected to the
internet will be triple that of the global population by
2023, half of which will be machine-to-machine linkag-
es that could transform existing business models. 95 The
Covid-19 pandemic has further accelerated digitaliza -
tion across all sectors as companies shift to cloud-based
storage and remote work where possible. Large data sets
are also essential for training machine learning algo -
rithms that will be vital to leadership in artificial intelli-
gence applications.
As with other types of economic interactions, rules
are necessary to protect against abuse of individu -
al rights and ensure open commerce. Contact-tracing
applications have taken center stage in the fight against
Covid-19, and high-profile privacy violations and alle -
gations of aggressive collection of personal data under-
score the importance of regulations and strict enforce -
ment to protect users.96 In addition to privacy concerns,
countries are increasingly limiting free flows of data and
enacting localization requirements which require for -
eign companies to store data domestically, often justi -
fied on dubious cybersecurity grounds. Various studies
have estimated that barriers to data flow and localiza -
tion requirements reduce GDP and productivity. 97
Competing Governance
Regimes
Despite the importance of applications reliant on large
data sets for future economic growth, there have been no
successful international efforts to set rules directing its
collection, processing, storage, and use. In the absence
of global governance, countries have built their own re-
gimes, which create overlapping, conflicting systems.
Broadly, there are three main approaches: bureaucratic
regulation and enforcement of privacy and competition
law, championed by the European Union; state access to

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
23
CHAMPIONING DATA GOVERNANCE
quirements will force firms to build redundant storage
facilities, raising costs and increasing physical access
points for bad actors.
Many governments have recognized the undesirable
outcome of data balkanization, yet progress on a com -
mon set of rules is anemic at best. The members of
the WTO plurilateral working group on e-commerce
account for over 90 percent of global trade but have
not made notable progress since talks began in ear -
nest in early 2019. 107 Given the diverse nature of the
group, which includes China, the European Union,
and the United States, as well as the broader issues
facing the WTO, agreement on contentious issues is
unlikely. Japan won endorsement of its “data free flow
with trust” (DFFT) framework in the 2019 Group of
Twenty (G20) communiqué, but alignment on any
specific proposals is doubtful. 108
Since the Osaka Summit, the United States and China
have championed competing visions for data gover -
nance. The U.S. Clean Network initiative, announced
in August 2020, seeks to protect personal privacy and
sensitive corporate information from “aggressive in -
trusions by malign actors. ” 109 The Clean Network has
the support of more than 30 countries and territories,
but that does not include binding commitments. In re -
sponse, Beijing unveiled its “Initiative on Global Data
Security, ” which calls on countries to maintain open
telecommunications supply chains while respecting
state sovereignty over data flows. 110 Although China
has urged other countries to join its program, support
thus far has been limited.
Countries have made more progress toward regula -
tory alignment at the bilateral and regional level. The
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) restricts
data localization requirements and endorses APEC’s
Cross-Border Privacy Rules as “a valid mechanism” to
enable data flows while protecting privacy.111 The “phase
one” trade deal between the United States and Japan
includes a side agreement that bans customs duties on
digital products, facilitates cross-border data flows, and
bans localization.112 More significantly, in January 2019
cess personal data at its discretion. 103 Both laws only
vaguely define key concepts, giving regulators room
to expand the scope of their authority. To complement
legislative efforts, Beijing has instituted standards that
force foreign companies to build China versions of
their products and grant government regulators access
to source code, raising concerns of foreign technology
transfer and IP infringement.104
In contrast to other leading economies, Washington
has taken a largely hands-off approach toward data
governance and privacy protection. While Congress
increasingly recognizes the importance of a national
regulatory regime, it has failed to pass legislation. Ab -
sent federal action, state legislatures have taken steps
to improve privacy, led by the California Consumer
Privacy Act (CCPA), effective January 2020. As the
first broad, horizontal privacy regulation in the Unit -
ed States, CCPA is narrower than GDPR but increases
transparency and gives California residents the op -
tion to opt out of the sale of personal data to third
parties (however, unlike GDPR, they cannot opt out
of the collection of personal data). 105 Others states,
from Nevada to New Y ork, are independently consid -
ering a range of privacy regulations, underscoring the
need for a national framework.
Risks of Data Balkanization
The patchwork of national and subnational laws gov -
erning the use, storage, and flow of data risks creating
a balkanized, negative-sum outcome. Without federal
regulation in the United States and alignment between
national regimes, companies will have to comply with
different, potentially contradictory legal guidelines to
serve their customers. Restrictions on the free flow of
data could limit the transfer of information, which will
create challenges to financial stability and monitor -
ing.106 The lack of interoperability can impair sharing
of electronic medical records, which are important to
managing public health crises. Various localization re -

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
24
CHAMPIONING DATA GOVERNANCE
the European Commission recognized “mutual adequa-
cy” between GDPR and Japan’s data protection, enabling
the free flow of data between the two envisaged under
their 2018 trade agreement.113 Discussions on adequacy
have helped promote harmonization based on mutual
acceptance of first principles.
The United States and like-minded countries should
build on recent momentum to promote a common ap -
proach to data governance. While there are important
distinctions between the U.S. and EU views on data
privacy, they are minor compared with the different
philosophy underpinning the Chinese regime. Indeed,
some elements of GDPR, such as mandatory breach
notifications and child data protections, were inspired
by U.S. law. Alignment between advanced economies
can help support a “fifth pillar” of global economic
governance for data issues, akin to the International
Monetary Fund for global payments, the World Bank
for development, the WTO for trade, and the arrange -
ments governing energy set up in the 1970s. 114

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
25
RECOMMENDATIONS
Invest in Innovation
The United States is still the global leader in many
cutting-edge technologies, but its position is peril -
ous and competitors are rapidly catching up. Failure
to strengthen key components of the U.S. innovation
system will accelerate the United States’ relative de -
cline. As the United States emerges from the Covid-19
pandemic, policymakers should seize the moment to
reaffirm U.S. leadership in innovation. Doing so will
C
ontinuing to lead at the technological fron -
tier will require a sustained and coordinated
effort at the national and international level.
The Commission on Affirming American Leadership
recommends the following seven elements of a na -
tional technology strategy, organized in three lines
of effort: investing in innovation; protecting critical
technologies; and championing data governance. If
adopted, these recommendations would sharpen the
U.S. innovative edge and position the country for
long-term leadership.
Recommendations
05

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
26
RECOMMENDATIONS
younger researchers will help recruit new tal -
ent and invest in human capital with a longer
timeline of return. 116 Project managers should
be encouraged to support riskier projects and
continue to tolerate failure, which is inevitable
with ambitious research. Individual, high-pro -
file failures, such as the Solyndra project,
should help managers refine their approach,
not derail federal investment. 117
iii. Deepen public-private partnerships for
pre-competitive technologies, especially with
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Increase funding for the Small Business Innova -
tion Research (SBIR) and Small Business Tech -
nology Transfer (STTR) Programs, which con -
nect SMEs with federal resources, and expand
the number of Manufacturing USA technology
institutes, including to focus on climate adap -
tion and mitigation applications. 118
b. Improve STEM education outcomes and workforce
inclusiveness.
i. Allocate funding for states and municipalities to
upgrade STEM learning equipment at primary
and secondary schools.
ii. Increase funding for federal STEM development
programs such as the National Defense Edu -
cation Program and the Department of Edu -
cation’s Minority Science and Engineering Im -
provement Program.
iii. Expand federal scholarship and debt forgiveness
opportunities for women and underrepresented
minorities pursuing STEM degrees.
iv. Deepen mentoring and traineeship programs
between federal research-funding agencies/
national laboratories and historically black
colleges and universities and high Hispanic
enrollment institutions. 119
c. Expand opportunities for highly skilled individuals
to work and remain in the United States.120
support rising living standards for Americans and po -
sition the country to address societal challenges, from
the threat of economic adversaries, to climate change,
to public health crises.
1. Recommit to the innovation base
During the Cold War, the United States built a nation -
al innovation system on collaboration between gov -
ernment, academia, and the private sector. Thanks to
that foundation, the United States remains a leader
in cutting-edge technology today. However, federal
support for R&D has waned in recent decades, and
policymakers have grown complacent about sup -
porting a highly skilled workforce. Reaffirming U.S.
leadership begins with reinvesting in the innovation
base: increasing federal funding for R&D, strength -
ening and diversifying a world-class talent pipeline,
encouraging business investment, and building dig -
ital infrastructure.
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Restore federal R&D funding to a minimum of 1
percent of GDP (its post-War World II average) over
the next 5 to 10 years. This would involve increasing
spending by roughly $100 billion per year, or about
80 percent of current expenditures ($127 billion in
2018).115 Part of the increase should support proj -
ects and research that address climate, defense, and
health challenges. Funding should go toward applied
and basic research, as well as targeted support for
early-stage development of critical technologies (dis-
cussed further in the next section).
i. Support longer-term, predictable budgets for sci -
ence agencies by extending funding cycles and
placing an initial moratorium on budget cuts for
five years. Limiting budgetary uncertainty would
nudge federal R&D spending toward more ambi-
tious research, rather than more “doable” projects
undertaken to secure funding.
ii. Empower younger scientists and tolerate fail -
ures. Directing more investment toward

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
27
RECOMMENDATIONS
mechanisms ranging from trade policy, to subsidies,
to outright theft. All of the world’s leading economies,
including the United States, channel resources toward
specific sectors. As U.S. competitors double down on
government intervention, the United States should
consider expanding targeted support or risk being at
a disadvantage.
Within this environment, guardrails are necessary to en-
sure that federal programs have clear missions, build co-
operation with industry, and maintain flexibility to adapt
to changing market conditions. Government interven -
tion should support critical sectors and broad technol -
ogy categories (such as AI), not pick specific companies,
technologies, or narrow applications (such as a certain
machine learning algorithm). Government purchasing is
generally a more effective tool than subsidies and should
promote early-stage technology categories, not estab -
lished industries. Policies should have clear sunset pro-
visions and exit strategies to maintain urgency and miti-
gate long-term dependency. Any support should adhere
to international law or plurilateral commitments. Finally,
policies should be crafted with the input of industry and
informed by technical expertise.
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Reconstitute the Congressional Office of Technology
Assessment (OTA).122 A revived OTA would provide
robust and actionable briefings for legislators and their
staff and would assess how emerging technologies
impact U.S. competitiveness and national security, in-
cluding which countries are leading. Such assessments
would inform the development, implementation, and
monitoring of a national innovation strategy.
b. Leverage government purchasing power to create
markets for and stimulate investment in the devel -
opment and production of early-stage technologies.
i. Potential examples include using AI to manage gov-
ernment tax records and detect fraud, enhancing
power grids and transport networks with internet
of things (IoT) applications, and incorporating
i. Elminiate the cap on annual H-1B visas and regu-
larly review the covered skills to ensure they keep
up with rapidly developing technology.
ii. Eliminate the country cap and duration limit for
H-1B visas.
iii. Extend the Optional Practical Training (OPT)
period from one year to five years.
iv. Provide green cards to immigrants that receive
advanced STEM degrees in the United States.
v. Create an abbreviated filing process for existing
H-1B visa recipients seeking to change jobs be -
tween two U.S. employers.
d. Increase federal tax incentives for private sector
R&D to the OECD median of 0.11 percent of GDP ,
up from 0.07 percent of GDP .
i. Reverse scheduled tax changes that would require
companies to amortize domestic research expen-
ditures over five years, rather than immediately
deducting expenses.
ii. Invest in national digital infrastructure, especially by
improving broadband access in rural and other un-
derserved communities, to close connectivity gaps.
iii. Enable open access of public sector data, where
possible. Open data will encourage firms to col -
laborate with peers rather than withhold data
from them.121 As data is more accessible, govern-
ment must work to improve public trust around
the issues of data privacy and ethics so that the
data marketplace can thrive.
2. Support key technology categories
Broad investments in the innovation base are a neces -
sary but not sufficient element of a national strategy.
Targeted federal action can mobilize resources and cat-
alyze efforts to develop and manufacture breakthrough
technologies. Today’s global technology race involves
competitors that target favored industries and compa -
nies, providing massive support through a variety of

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
28
RECOMMENDATIONS
encourages research partnerships and personnel
exchanges.129
iv. Establish information-sharing mechanisms be -
tween like-minded governments to better under-
stand the global emerging technology landscape.
3. Set global standards
The U.S. approach to international standards setting has
typically been from the bottom up, allowing industry
to take the lead in setting standards based on techni -
cal knowledge and market demands. In contrast, China
and the European Union have taken a more state-led ap-
proach to standard-setting, prioritizing active participa-
tion in standards-setting bodies. To compete in today’s
standards environment, Washington needs to develop
and implement proactive strategies to push back on
this state-led approach in which it takes a stronger role
in supporting U.S.-developed standards and domestic
companies and experts’ renewed active participation in
the technical process.
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Uphold due process and consensus-based stan -
dards-setting processes.
i. Encourage reforms that limit the number of propos-
als submitted per company or country to address
concerns of some participants “flooding the zone. ”
ii. Promote wider geographical participation in stan-
dards-setting bodies to include more voices that
align with U.S. approaches.
b. Ensure future export controls and other restrictions
on technology transfer do not limit U.S. participa -
tion in standards-setting processes. The Depart -
ment of Commerce’s June 2020 rule allowing U.S.
companies to actively participate in standard-set -
ting groups where Huawei is present should set a
precedent for future engagement with companies
on the entity list or that face sanctions. 130
c. Ensure that U.S. trading partners meet their com -
electric- and battery-powered vehicles into na -
tional, state, and local government fleets.
c. Establish networks of universities for exploratory re-
search and design of advanced technologies mod -
eled on the Semiconductor Technology Advanced
Research Network (STARnet). 123 Such networks
could also help companies’ prototype and beta-test
new inventions and processes.
d. Expand nimble government funding programs for
applied research and experimental development
by expanding the DOD Defense Innovation Unit’s
National Security Investment Capital program and
adopting pilot programs at the National Academy of
Sciences and the Department of Energy.124
e. Accelerate regulatory processes and domestic stan -
dards-setting processes to facilitate commercializa -
tion of critical technologies earlier in innovation life
cycles.125 Such efforts should facilitate regulatory test
beds to allow real-world prototyping of emerging
technologies while minimizing safety risks.126
i. Improve technical capacity at national and state reg-
ulatory agencies by detailing experts from federal
science agencies and national laboratories.
f. Direct the U.S. Export-Import Bank to consider U.S.-
based intellectual property and R&D expenditures
as qualifying content for financing to better account
for value in the technology sector.127
g. Work with allies where possible, recognizing that
there will be limits to this cooperation based on pri-
vate-sector competition.
ii. Explore opportunities to share and pool large,
non-sensitive data sets (e.g., weather data,
epidemiological data, traffic data) between
like-minded countries to improve machine
learning algorithms. 128
iii. Support and expand ongoing basic scientific col-
laboration, such as the EU-Japan-U.S. Internation-
al Symposium on Quantum Technology, which

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
29
RECOMMENDATIONS
U.S. industry and ultimately impair national security by
limiting sales, market share, and future domestic R&D
investment. Further, the global nature of trade, invest -
ment, and research means that the United States risks
isolating itself and falling behind if it acts unilaterally.
Poorly designed and overbroad unilateral controls will
not achieve their underlying national security objectives
and could compromise U.S. competitiveness and inno-
vation leadership.
4. Promote whole-of-government
technology control policy
As a guiding principle, policymakers should reaffirm the
benefits of open investment, trade, and research while
tailoring control mechanisms to address specific vulnera-
bilities and taking multilateral action where possible. Re-
strictions on technology transfer should reflect three ba-
sic criteria: First, they should only apply to technologies
that are essential to national security. Second, they must
be effective. This means the United States should not act
unilaterally when there are alternate foreign suppliers of
a technology. A multilateral approach leverages relation-
ships to increase efficacy, reduce enforcement costs, and
prevent technology leakage to countries of concern. Fi-
nally, the government should consult with industry and
consider the costs to U.S. economic and innovation lead-
ership. Some level of efficiency loss due to controls may
be necessary, but policymakers should assess the impact
on future U.S. competitiveness before taking action. Pol-
icymakers should ensure transparent due process proce-
dures to engage stakeholders and should continuously
evaluate the effectiveness of existing controls.
Recent reforms to U.S. technology control mechanisms
through FIRRMA and ECRA legislation have sought
to strike the appropriate balance to address specific na-
tional security concerns while preserving open foreign
investment and research collaboration. As policymakers
implement these reforms, they should continue to keep
controls tailored to specific national security concerns
and improve coordination between agencies in charge of
technology transfer instruments.
mitments under the WTO Agreement on Technical
Barriers to Trade by recognizing international stan-
dards developed by the private sector, in addition to
those developed by official-sector standard-setting
bodies.
d. Adopt a more strategic approach to working within
international standard-setting groups to promote
outcomes that are acceptable to U.S. companies.
i. Distinguish areas where the private sector can con-
tinue to lead from those where more government
involvement is necessary to support key industries.
ii. In cases where government involvement is nec -
essary or viewed by private sector voices as ad -
ditive, coordinate with allies to form coalitions
in order to reinforce the desirability of standards
that uphold shared values.
iii. Constructively participate in higher-level stan -
dards-related discussions in the G20, the Asia-Pa-
cific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and
the WTO.
e. Provide steady funding over complete standards-setting
cycles to enable U.S. government representatives to
participate fully in standards-setting discussions, and
create competitive grants, where applicable, to facilitate
academic and private sector expert participation.
Protect Critical
Technologies
Openness to trade, investment, and research supports
U.S. technological leadership and economic prosperity;
yet some restrictions on the transfer of technologies that
are essential to national security are necessary. Strik -
ing the correct balance between control and openness
is best understood as a trade-off within national secu -
rity, not just between national security and econom -
ics. Decisions to limit openness could limit technolo -
gy leakage in the short term, but overcontrol will hurt

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
30
RECOMMENDATIONS
nologies and choke points that could be controlled
through restrictions on limited, indispensable
suppliers, in coordination with key allies.
d. Reaffirm NSDD-189, which limits restrictions on
exchange of fundamental research to the maximum
extent possible.
e. With respect to inbound investment, conduct risk
mitigation exercises based on likely implications for
access to critical technologies.
f. Ensure adequate due process and procedural pro -
tections through advanced notices of proposed
rulemaking, sufficient public comment periods, and
transparent implementing regulations. Final rules
should be clear and precise to minimize uncertainty
for U.S. businesses.
5. Work with allies on multilateral
 technology controls
The United States is the preeminent, but no longer domi-
nant, actor in the global economy. In this environment, the
unilateral use of economic tools risks isolating the United
States without achieving specific national security goals.
Unilateral decisions are both less effective (there are other
producers) and more costly (the United States could divert
benign or low-risk foreign capital, knowledge, and tech-
nology to other markets) than in previous decades. Mul-
tilateral cooperation is necessary both to maximize policy
effectiveness and minimize negative spillover risks. Work-
ing with allies can be cumbersome and time consuming,
but it is necessary to implement effective policy.
U.S. allies and partners share similar concerns with Wash-
ington about national security risks stemming from tech-
nology transfer, especially from China, but are earlier in
their reform cycles. Washington and allied capitals have
recently launched several formal channels for discussing
policies related to China, and several U.S. partners have
strengthened investment screening regimes and guidance
for foreign research collaboration.132 Policymakers should
continue to invest in new and existing structures to deepen
alignment between technology control systems.
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Maintain a standing White House-led interagency
working group at the deputy level to set technolo -
gy control strategy with participation from agencies
tasked with implementing five main policy areas:
investment screening; export controls; research col-
laboration; supply chain integrity; and cybersecurity.
i. Such a group would meet quarterly to align on
top-level objectives, standardize guidance, and
share information on the effectiveness of current
controls and outstanding vulnerabilities.
• These meetings would expand on the agenda
of existing interagency investment screening
and export control working groups to encom -
pass all mechanisms for managing critical
technology transfer.
b. Define a common set of critical technologies vital to
national security for use across agencies overseeing
control mechanisms based on the definition and
process specified in the FIRRMA legislation. A com-
mon list would help focus federal efforts and dis -
courage self-defeating blanket restrictions.
i. The list of critical technologies should be regularly
updated, both to add new items and remove out-
dated ones.
ii. Classification should reflect robust input from in-
dustry and academia, including by drawing on the
Department of Commerce’s Emerging Technology
and Research Technical Advisory Committee.131
c. Identify critical technology hardware “choke-points, ”
where control is both possible and effective in pro -
tecting essential national security interests, meaning
there are a limited number of producers located do-
mestically or in allied countries and there are high
switching costs (such as extreme ultraviolet lithogra-
phy machines used to manufacture semiconductors).
i. Agencies could partner with the private sector to
better understand supply chains of critical tech -

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
31
RECOMMENDATIONS
countries with significant market share in a
specific technology category.
• Sprint groups would propose controls (and de-
controls) to the relevant multilateral regime,
such as the dual-use-focused Wassenaar Ar -
rangement, and adopt plurilateral controls
between sprint group countries if wider align -
ment is delayed.
• The export control working group would also
discuss the multilateral use of export controls
for foreign policy goals, such as anti-terrorism.
iv. The research collaboration group would encour -
age ongoing efforts by regulators and academia
in ATC countries to share information on high-
risk researchers and would establish common
regulatory and disclosure guidelines to uphold
research integrity.
b. Accelerate multilateral export control update cycles
by convening plenaries for the four major existing
regimes twice a year. This would better reflect the
rapid pace of technological change and reduce in -
centives for provisional unilateral controls.
Champion Data
Governance
Despite the role of data in driving future economic
growth, there have been no successful international
efforts to set rules directing its collection, processing,
storage, and use. In the absence, countries have built
their own regimes, which creates overlapping, conflict -
ing systems, while the United States has taken a back -
seat. The lack of global agreement has fueled concerns
of balkanized governance regimes that disadvantage
U.S. companies in a vital growth industry.
In this context, the United States should take a lead -
ership role in creating a more cohesive framework of
rules, standards, and norms for the digital space as a
“fifth pillar” of global governance, akin to the Bretton
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Establish an Allied Technology Control (ATC) group
with like-minded countries to develop mechanisms
for sharing information to better coordinate and
manage technology transfer. The body would have
a secretariat composed of senior officials and work -
ing groups for each control instrument (investment
screening, export controls, research collaboration)
with technical-level staff.
i. The secretariat would meet annually to align on
goals, strategy, and understanding of technologies
essential to national security. The working groups
would meet at least biannually to discuss updates
to member regimes, similar to the cadence of
Group of Seven (G7) ministerial meetings.
ii. The investment screening working group would
develop a multilateral investment review body,
similar to the EU system, that would:
• Facilitate sharing of business confidential in -
formation between different governments for
foreign inbound investments;
• Issue opinions to ATC members on the strate -
gic implications of potential investments in and
acquisitions of critical technology companies
headquartered in allied countries, which would
inform national approval decisions;
• Provide technical assistance to members seek -
ing to establish and strengthen investment
screening regimes; and
• Expedite transactions between companies from
ATC members with adequate screening re -
gimes, including by classifying ATC countries
as “excepted foreign states” in U.S. regulations.
iii. The export control group would promote pluri -
lateral controls by organizing “sprint groups” to
identify potential technologies for control within
broad critical technology categories.
• Each sprint group would convene technical
experts and export control officials from ATC

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
32
RECOMMENDATIONS
Woods institutions and the 1970s energy arrangements.
To do so, the United States must accelerate efforts to
develop national privacy legislation. At the same time,
Washington should work with like-minded countries to
promote a shared approach to digital rules.
6. Adopt national data privacy regulation
If the United States does not step up in discussions on
the rules, standards, and norms that govern data privacy
and digital trade, others will. Beijing and Brussels have
each articulated a data privacy framework, but Wash -
ington is conspicuously missing from the conversation.
In the absence of national U.S. legislation, states are de-
bating their own laws, risking a patchwork of guidance
in the domestic market.
The Covid-19 pandemic and calls for contact-tracing
applications underscore the importance of data priva -
cy and should create urgency for a national framework.
There has been momentum toward legislation, but pro-
posals remain deeply partisan. 133 If lawmakers do not
put aside these unproductive roadblocks, they risk di -
minishing U.S. capability to influence global digital gov-
ernance, putting U.S. companies and the U.S. economy
at a substantial competitive disadvantage.
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Create a bipartisan congressional task force man -
dated with drafting comprehensive personal data
privacy legislation by the end of 2021, building on
existing state-level legislation and bills under debate
in Congress.
b. Continue to negotiate mutual adequacy with differ -
ent privacy regimes, especially the European Union’s
GDPR, to support free flows of data.
i. Establish formal bilateral or plurilateral mechanisms
to monitor compliance with supplemental rules
that bridge gaps between national privacy regimes.
ii. Include discussions in trade negotiations on priva-
cy and pathways to mutual adequacy agreements.
7. Align data governance principles
with allies
To prevent data balkanization, Washington should seek
to align data governance frameworks with allies, to the
extent appropriate. As discussed in the global trade
framework chapter of this report, the United States
should two-track e-commerce and digital trade negotia-
tions at the plurilateral and WTO level, building on mo-
mentum of recent agreements with Japan, Mexico, and
Canada. Constructive U.S. leadership is necessary to
support a “fifth pillar” of global economics governance
for data issues, akin to the International Monetary Fund
for global payments, the World Bank for development,
the WTO for trade, and the arrangements governing
energy set up in the 1970s.
IMPLEMENTATION STEPS
a. Establish a regular working group with the nine
countries participating in the APEC Cross-Border
Privacy Rules with the goal of aligning national data
governance regimes based on APEC Cross-Border
Privacy Rules and digital rules from the USMCA,
U.S.-Japan digital trade agreement, and Compre -
hensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacif-
ic Partnership (CPTPP). 134
i. The group would start with lower-hanging fruit,
such as digital customs duties and processes for
securely sharing data with other law enforcement
or regulatory agencies, and progress to more con-
tentious issues, such as cloud computing regula -
tions and digital services taxation, recognizing
that some differences will not be solved.135
• The group should focus on regulations to pro -
mote interoperability in areas where alignment
cannot be reached.
ii. As part of negotiations, the plurilateral working
group should establish mechanisms to monitor
compliance and establish clear processes for
enforcement.

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
33
RECOMMENDATIONS
iii. If alignment is reached, this group would bring pro-
posals first to other U.S. allies and partners, espe-
cially the European Union, and later to the WTO.
b. Affirm and enforce preferred data governance prin -
ciples through existing and future trade agreements,
using the USMCA and the U.S.-Japan Digital Agree-
ment as templates (as discussed in the global trade
chapter of this report).
c. Establish a multilateral forum among like-minded
countries designed to forge consensus around pol -
icy principles, specific standards, and regulatory ap-
proaches to broader digital governance. This would
build on the efforts proposed in recommendations
(a) and (b).
i. This forum would aspire to build an institution -
al structure to uphold a cohesive framework of
rules, standards, and norms governing the digital
space, just as existing international institutions
oversee global finance, trade, development, and
energy matters.

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
34
CONCLUSION
of climate change—underscore the need for an innova-
tion strategy that adapts previously effective policy to
the modern economy. Policymakers should marshal the
resources necessary to meet and win the challenges of
the twenty-first century and reaffirm U.S. technological
leadership.
I
n the Cold War, the United Sates adopted a national
strategy that established the country as the leader
in cutting-edge technology and research and de -
velopment. This approached leveraged the strengths of
business, government, and academia while promoting
an open trading system, supporting domestic educa -
tion, and attracting foreign talent. In recent decades,
policymakers have grown complacent, resting on the
Cold War foundation without modernizing or main -
taining it. Federal R&D funding as a percent of GDP has
atrophied, breakthrough technological advances have
stalled, and the United States has turned inward. Today’s
challenges—a global pandemic, China’s emergence as a
strategic and highly capable competitor, and the specter
06
Conclusion

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
35
CONCLUSION
Policy, teaching courses in globalization, trade policy,
and politics.
Scott Miller is a senior adviser with the Abshire-In -
amori Leadership Academy, focusing on leadership
development programs for public- and private-sector
executives. From 2012 until 2017, he held the William
M. Scholl Chair in International Business at CSIS. The
Scholl Chair focuses on key issues in the global econ -
omy, such as international trade, investment, competi -
tiveness, and innovation. From 1997 to 2012, Mr. Miller
was director for global trade policy at Procter & Gam -
ble, a leading consumer products company. In that po -
sition, he was responsible for the full range of interna -
tional trade, investment, and business facilitation issues
for the company. He led many campaigns supporting
U.S. free trade agreements and has been a contributor to
U.S. trade and investment policy over many years. Mr.
Miller is a member of the State Department’s Advisory
Committee on International Economic Policy. Earlier in
his career, he was a manufacturing, marketing, and gov-
ernment relations executive for Procter & Gamble in the
United States and Canada.
About the Authors
and Editors
Matthew P . Goodman is senior vice president for eco -
nomics and holds the William E. Simon Chair in Polit-
ical Economy at CSIS. The Economics Program, which
he directs, examines current issues in international eco-
nomic policy, with a focus on the Asia-Pacific region.
Previously, Goodman served as director for interna -
tional economics on the National Security Council staff,
working on the G-20, APEC, and other presidential
summits. Before joining the White House, he was senior
adviser to the undersecretary for economic affairs at the
U.S. Department of State. He has also worked at Al -
bright Stonebridge Group, Goldman Sachs, and served
as U.S. Treasury attaché in Tokyo. Goodman holds an
MA from the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced Inter-
national Studies and a BSc from the London School of
Economics.
Dylan Gerstel is a research assistant with the Econom-
ics Program at the Center for Strategic and Interna -
tional Studies (CSIS), where he focuses on U.S. global
economic leadership. Prior to joining CSIS, he worked
as an associate at Hamilton Place Strategies and as an
economic policy intern for Vice President Joe Biden. He
graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Swarthmore College
with a B.A. in political science and statistics.
William Reinsch holds the Scholl Chair in Internation-
al Business at the Center for Strategic and International
Studies (CSIS) and is a senior adviser at Kelley, Drye &
Warren LLP . Previously, he served for 15 years as pres-
ident of the National Foreign Trade Council, where he
led efforts in favor of open markets, in support of the
Export-Import Bank and Overseas Private Investment
Corporation, against unilateral sanctions, and in sup -
port of sound international tax policy, among many is -
sues. From 2001 to 2016, he concurrently served as a
member of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Re -
view Commission. He is also an adjunct assistant pro -
fessor at the University of Maryland School of Public

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
36
ENDNOTES
Endnotes
1 Mark Boroush, “U.S. R&D Increased by $32 Billion in 2017, to
$548 billion; Estimate for 2018 Indicates a Further Rise to
$580 billion, ” National Science Foundation, January 8, 2020,
https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2020/nsf20309/.
2 Ibid.
3 “Main Science and Technology Indicators: Gross Domestic
Expenditure on R&D as a Percentage of GDP , ” Organisation
for Economic Co-operation (OECD), https://www.oecd.org/
sti/msti.htm#:~:text=Research%20and%20development%20
(R%26D)%20intensity,Technology%20Indicators%20
(MSTI)%20database.
4 Beethika Khan, Carol Robbins, and Abigail Okrent, The State
of Science and Engineering 2020 (Alexandria, V A: National
Science Foundation Science & Engineering Indicators,
January 2020), https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20201/
global-r-d.
5 Ibid.
6 Caleb Foote and Robert D. Atkinson, “Federal Support for
R&D Continues Its Ignominious Slide, ” Information Technol-
ogy and Innocation Foundation, August 12, 2019, https://itif.
org/publications/2019/08/12/federal-support-rd-contin-
ues-its-ignominious-slide.
7 “Frascati Manual 2015 Glossary of Terms, ” Organisation for
Economic Co-operation, 2015, http://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/
Frascati-2015-Glossary.pdf; and Khan, Robbins, and Okrent,
The State of Science and Engineering 2020.
8 Neil Ashby, “Relativity in the Global Positioning System, ”
Living Reviews in Relativity 6, no. 1 (2003): 1, https://link.
springer.com/article/10.12942/lrr-2003-1.
9 “Main Science and Technology Indicators: Basic Research
Expenditure as a Percentage of GDP , ” OECD.
10 Ibid.
11 Ibid.
12 Khan, Robbins, and Okrent, The State of Science and Engineer-
ing 2020.
13 Boroush, “U.S. R&D Increased by $32 Billion in 2017. ”
14 Khan, Robbins, and Okrent, The State of Science and Engineer-
ing 2020.
15 Jonathan Gruber and Simon Johnson, Jump-Starting America:
How Breakthrough Science Can Revive Economic Growth and
the American Dream (New Y ork: Public Affairs, 2019).
16 J. John Wu, “Why U.S. Business R&D is Not as Strong as it
Appears, ” Information Technology and Innovation Founda-
tion, June 2018, http://www2.itif.org/2018-us-business-rd.pdf.
17 Mariana Mazzucato, The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking
Public vs. Private Sector Myths (New Y ork: Public Affairs, 2015).
18 Congressional Research Service, The Bayh-Dole Act: Selected
Issues in Patent Policy and the Commercialization of Technolo-
gy, CRS Report No. RL32076 (Washington, DC: December
2012), https://www.everycrsreport.com/files/20121203_
RL32076_836129be0e45a4049a32a64c143ec94df38236be.pdf.
19 “The Bayh-Dole Act: A Guide to the Law and Implementing
Regulations, ” Council on Governmental Relations, October
1999, https://www.cogr.edu/sites/default/files/The_Bayh-
Dole_Act-__A_Guide_to_the_Law_and_Implementing_Reg-
ulations.pdf.
20 Gruber and Johnson, Jump-Starting America.
21 Paula Stephan, “The Endless Frontier: Reaping What Bush
Sowed?, ” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper 19687, https://www.nber.org/papers/w19687.pdf;
Albert Banal-Estanol, Ines Macho-Stadler, and David
Perez-Castrillo, “Key success drivers in public research grants:
Funding the seeds of radical innovation in academia?, ” Center
for Economic Studies & Ifo Institute, Working Paper Series
5852, April 2016, https://www.cesifo.org/DocDL/cesifo1_
wp5852.pdf.
22 U.S. figure from 2014 (last value available) and OECD median
from 2017. “R&D Tax Expenditure and Direct Government
Funding of BERD: Indirect Government Support Through
R&D Tax Incentives, ” OECD, https://stats.oecd.org/Index.
aspx?DataSetCode=RDTAX.
23 Ernst and Y oung, Impact of the amortization of certain R&D
expenditures on R&D spending in the United States (London:
October 2019), https://investinamericasfuture.org/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2019/10/EY-RD-Coalition-TCJA-R-and-D-
amortization-report-Oct-2019-1.pdf.
24 Ibid.
25 “Key ICT Indicators, ” OECD, https://www.oecd.org/sti/
broadband/oecdkeyictindicators.htm.
26 Andrew Perrin, “Digital Gap Between Rural and Nonrural
America Persists, ” Pew Research Center, May 31, 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/05/31/digi-
tal-gap-between-rural-and-nonrural-america-persists/.
27 Khan, Robbins, and Okrent, The State of Science and Engineer-
ing 2020.
28 Ibid.
29 “Education Spending: Primary to Post-secondary Non-tertia-
ry, ” OECD, https://data.oecd.org/eduresource/educa-
tion-spending.htm; and “Mathematics performance (PISA), ”
OECD, https://data.oecd.org/pisa/mathematics-perfor-
mance-pisa.htm.
30 Susan Rotermund and Karen White, “Elementary and
Secondary Mathematics and Science Education, ” National
Science Foundation, September 4, 2019, https://ncses.nsf.gov/
pubs/nsb20196/.
31 Dana Goldstein, “Research Shows Students Falling Months
Behind During Virus Disruptions, ” New York Times, June 5,
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/05/us/coronavi-
rus-education-lost-learning.html.
32 Amy Burke, “Science and Engineering Labor Force, ” National
Science Foundation, September 26, 2019, https://ncses.nsf.gov/
pubs/nsb20198/demographic-trends-of-the-s-e-workforce.
33 Ibid.
34 Ibid.
35 Khan, Robbins, and Okrent, The State of Science and Engineer-
ing 2020.
36 Ibid.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
37
ENDNOTES
hhs.gov/about/news/2020/06/16/fact-sheet-explaining-opera-
tion-warp-speed.html.
49 Congressional Research Service, U.S. Semiconductor Manufac-
turing: Industry Trends, Global Competition, Federal Policy,
CRS Report No. R44544 (Washington, DC: June 2016),
https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/R44544.html.
50 Marco Rubio, “We Need a More Resilient American Econo-
m y,” New York Times, April 20, 2020, https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/04/20/opinion/marco-rubio-coronavirus-economy.
html; and Jeffrey Mervis, “United States should make a
massive investment in AI, top Senate Democrat says, ” Science,
November 11, 2019, https://www.sciencemag.org/
news/2019/11/united-states-should-make-massive-invest-
ment-ai-top-senate-democrat-says.
51 David H. McCormick, Charles E. Luftig, and James M.
Cunningham, “Economic Might, National Security, and the
Future of American Statecraft, ” Texas National Security Review
3, no. 3 (Summer 2020), https://tnsr.org/2020/05/econom-
ic-might-national-security-future-american-statecraft.
52 Soumitra Dutta, Bruno Lanvin, and Sacha Wunsch-Vincent,
eds., Global Innovation Index 2020 (Geneva: World Intellectu-
al Property Organization, 2020), https://www.globalinnova-
tionindex.org/gii-2020-report.
53 “Innovation Nation: An American Innovation Agenda for
2020, ” Business Roundtable.
54 Celia Merzbacher, (presentation, Quantum Economic
Development Consortium, n.d.), https://sites.nationalacade -
mies.org/cs/groups/pgasite/documents/webpage/
pga_191960.pdf .
55 “The Trump Administration Is Investing $1 Billion in
Research Institutes to Advance Industries of the Future, ” The
White House, August 26, 2020, https://www.whitehouse.gov/
articles/trump-administration-investing-1-billion-re-
search-institutes-advance-industries-future.
56 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology,
Ensuring Long-Term U.S. Leadership in Semiconductors
(Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President, January
2017), https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/
files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_ensuring_long-term_us_
leadership_in_semiconductors.pdf.
57 Charles Wessner, ed., Government-Industry Partnerships for
the Development of New Technologies (Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, 2003), 13-16, https://pdfs.
semanticscholar.org/4546/9283a7c-
5b782a9d736d242dd5c5338050bfa.pdf.
58 SEMATECH avoided anti-trust concerns by registering
through the National Cooperative Research Act of 1984,
which granted partial antitrust exemption to registered U.S.
R&D consortia.
59 Robert D. Hof, “Lessons from Sematech, ” MIT Technology
Review, July 25, 2011, https://www.technologyreview.
com/s/424786/lessons-from-Sematech/.
60 Wessner, ed., “Government-Industry Partnerships for the
Development of New Technologies, ” 13-16.
61 The WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Mea -
sures (ASCM) sets rules regarding subsidies and corre -
sponding countervailing action. The ASCM requires
members to notify all specific subsidies, deemed to exist if
37 Ibid.
38 “Immigrants and Nobel Prizes: 1901-2019, ” National
Foundation for American Policy, NFAP Policy Brief, October
2019, https://nfap.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/
Immigrants-and-Nobel-Prizes.NFAP-Policy-Brief.Octo-
ber-2019.pdf.
39 Ishan Banerjee and Matt Sheehan, “ America’s Got AI Talent:
US’ Big Lead in AI Research Is Built on Importing Research-
ers, ” Macro Polo, June 9, 2020, https://macropolo.org/
americas-got-ai-talent-us-big-lead-in-ai-research-is-built-on-
importing-researchers/.
40 Johana Bhuiyan, “Half of the Most Highly Valued Tech
Companies in the U.S. were Founded by Immigrants, ” Vox,
May 31, 2017, https://www.vox.com/2017/5/31/15720198/
immigrants-tech-innovation-good-for-america; and Stuart
Anderson, “Immigrants and Billion-Dollar Companies, ”
National Foundation for American Policy, October 2018,
https://nfap.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/2018-BIL-
LION-DOLLAR-STARTUPS.NFAP-Policy-Brief.2018.pdf.
41 “Proclamation Suspending Entry of Aliens Who Present a
Risk to the U.S. Labor Market Following the Coronavirus
Outbreak, ” The White House, June 22, 2020, https://www.
whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/proclamation-suspend-
ing-entry-aliens-present-risk-u-s-labor-market-following-
coronavirus-outbreak/.
42 “H-1B Denial Rates Through the Second Quarter of FY 2020, ”
National Foundation for American Policy, August 2020,
https://nfap.com/wp-content/
uploads/2020/08/H-1B-Denial-Rates-Analysis-Through-The-
Second-Quarter-Of-FY-2020.NFAP-Policy-Brief.Au-
gust-2020.pdf.
43 Xueying Han, Galen Stocking, Matthew A. Gebbie, and
Richard P . Appelbaum, “Will They Stay or Will They Go?
International Graduate Students and Their Decisions to Stay
or Leave the U.S. upon Graduation, ” PLoS ONE 10, no. 3
(March 11, 2015), https://journals.plos.org/plosone/arti-
cle?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0118183#abstract0.
44 “Innovation Nation: An American Innovation Agenda for
2020, ” Business Roundtable, January 2019, https://s3.
amazonaws.com/brt.org/BRT-InnovationNationReport.
pdf; and Daniel Griswold, “Reforming the US Immigration
System to Promote Growth, ” Mercatus Center, October 31,
2017, https://www.mercatus.org/publications/
trade-and-immigration/reforming-us-immigration-sys -
tem-promote-growth .
45 David Zweig and Siqin Kang, America Challenges China’s
National Talent Programs (Washington, DC: CSIS, May 5,
2020), https://www.csis.org/analysis/america-challenges-chi-
nas-national-talent-programs.
46 Robert D. Atkinson, “ The Case for a National Industrial
Strategy to Counter China’s Technological Rise, ” Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation, April 13, 2020,
https://itif.org/publications/2020/04/13/case-national-indus-
trial-strategy-counter-chinas-technological-rise.
47 For more information, see Gruber and Johnson, Jump-Starting
America; and Margaret O’Mara, The Code: Silicon Valley and the
Remaking of America (New Y ork: Penguin Press, 2019).
48 “Fact Sheet: Explaining Operation Warp Speed, ” Department
of Health and Human Services, June 16, 2020, https://www.

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
38
ENDNOTES
with-China-Could-End-US-Semiconductor-Mar-2020_tcm9-
240526.pdf.
72 “Summary of the Foreign Investment Risk Review Modern-
ization Act of 2018, ” U.S. Department of the Treasury Office
of Investment Security, 2018, https://www.treasury.gov/
resource-center/international/Documents/Summary-of-FIR-
RMA.pdf.
73 Thilo Hanemann, Daniel H. Rosen, Cassie Gao, and Adam
Lysenko, Two-Way Street – US-China Investment Trends –
2020 Update (New Y ork: Rhodium Group, May 2020), https://
rhg.com/research/two-way-street-us-china-investment-
trends-2020-update/.
74 “CFIUS clearance rate on China deals drops 33% under
Trump, ” Foreign Investment Watch, May 11, 2020, https://
foreigninvestmentwatch.com/cfius-clearance-rate-on-china-
deals-drops-33-under-trump/.
75 “Export Controls Act of 2018, ” U.S. Congress, 50 USC 4801,
August 13, 2018, https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/
publ232/PLAW-115publ232.pdf.
76 Ibid.
77 “ Addition of Software Specially Designed To Automate the
Analysis of Geospatial Imagery to the Export Control
Classification Number 0Y521 Series, ” U.S. Department of
Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security, January 6, 2020,
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-01-06/
pdf/2019-27649.pdf.
78 “Identification and Review of Controls for Certain Founda-
tional Technologies, ” U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau
of Industry and Security, August 27, 2020, https://www.
federalregister.gov/documents/2020/08/27/2020-18910/
identification-and-review-of-controls-for-certain-foundation-
al-technologies.
79 “Elimination of License Exception Civil End Users (CIV), ”
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and
Security, April 28, 2020, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/
pkg/FR-2020-04-28/pdf/2020-07240.pdf; and “Commerce
Addresses Huawei’s Efforts to Undermine Entity List,
Restricts Products Designed and Produced with U.S.
Technologies, ” U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of
Industry and Security, May 15, 2020, https://www.commerce.
gov/news/press-releases/2020/05/commerce-addresses-hua-
weis-efforts-undermine-entity-list-restricts.
80 “China Initiative Conference, ” (public event, CSIS, Washing-
ton, DC, February 6, 2020), https://www.csis.org/events/
china-initiative-conference.
81 Ibid.
82 Stephanie Segal and Dylan Gerstel, Research Collaboration in
an Age of Strategic Competition (Washington, DC: CSIS,
September 2019), https://www.csis.org/analysis/research-col-
laboration-era-strategic-competition.
83 “Update from the National Science and Technology Council
Joint Committee on Research Environments, ” White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy, July 9, 2019, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Update-
from-the-NSTC-Joint-Committee-on-Research-Environ-
ments-July-2019.pdf.
84 Michael S. Lauer, “ ACD Working Group on Foreign Influenc-
es on Research Integrity Update, ” National Institutes of
there is a financial contribution by a government or if there
is any form of income or price support and a benefit is
thereby conferred. A country can impose a countervailing
duty if it demonstrates that a foreign subsidy has harmed or
threatens to harm it. Like other WTO rules, developing
countries are exempt from some ASCM prohibitions. The
Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA) is a pact
among 48 WTO members to open government procurement
markets. The GPA requires that members treat suppliers
from other signatories no differently than domestic suppliers
(national treatment and non-discrimination) for the
procurement categories that each country has agreed to be
covered under the agreement. Notably, the GPA excludes
“procurement indispensable for national security. ” China is
not a GPA signatory.
62 William Alan Reinsch and Jack Caporal, “ A World in Crisis:
Will Buying American Help or Hurt?, ” CSIS, Critical
Questions, April 10, 2020, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
world-crisis-will-buying-american-help-or-hurt.
63 Emily de La Bruyère and Nathan Picarsic, China Standards
2035: Beijing’s Platform Geopolitics and “Standardization Work
in 2020” (Washington, DC: Horizon Advisory, April 2020),
https://www.horizonadvisory.org/china-standards-2035-first-
report.
64 U.S.-China Business Council (USCBC), China in Internation-
al Standards Setting: USCBC Recommendations for Construc-
tive Participation (Washington, DC: February 2020), https://
www.uschina.org/sites/default/files/china_in_international_
standards_setting.pdf.
65 Anna Gross and Madhumita Murgia, “China Shows its
Dominance in Surveillance Technology, ” Financial Times,
December 26, 2019, https://www.ft.com/content/b34d8ff8-
21b4-11ea-92da-f0c92e957a96.
66 John Chen et al., China’s Internet of Things (Vienna, V A: SOS
International, October 2018), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/
default/files/Research/SOSi_China%27s%20Internet%20
of%20Things.pdf.
67 Madhumita Murgia and Anna Gross, “Inside China’s
Controversial Mission to Reinvent the Internet, ” Financial
Times, March 27, 2020, https://www.ft.com/content/ba94c-
2bc-6e27-11ea-9bca-bf503995cd6f.
68 USCBC, China in International Standards Setting: USCBC
Recommendations for Constructive Participation.
69 Eric Hirshhorn, Foreign Students and Technology Transfer:
Distinguishing the Baby from the Bath Water (Washington,
DC: CSIS, May 2020), https://www.csis.org/analysis/
foreign-students-and-technology-transfer-distinguishing-ba-
by-bath-water.
70 Michael Brown and Pavneet Singh, China’s Technology
Transfer Strategy: How Chinese Investments in Emerging
Technology Enable A Strategic Competitor to Access the Crown
Jewels of U.S. Innovation (Mountain View, CA: Defense
Innovation Unit Experimental, February 2017), https://
admin.govexec.com/media/diux_chinatechnologytransfer-
study_jan_2018_(1).pdf.
71 Antonio Varas and Raj Varadarajan, How Restrictions to Trade
with China Could End U.S. Leadership in Semiconductors
(Boston: Boston Consulting Group, March 2020), https://
image-src.bcg.com/Images/BCG-How-Restricting-Trade-

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
39
SECTION TITLE HERE gy/2020/05/21/care19-dakota-privacy-coronavirus/.
97 Nigel Cory, “Cross-Border Data Flows: Where Are the
Barriers, and What Do They Cost?, ” Information Technology
and Innovation Foundation, May 2017, http://www2.itif.
org/2017-cross-border-data-flows.pdf.
98 Todd Ehret, “Data Privacy and GDPR at One Y ear, a U.S.
Perspective. Part One - Report Card, ” Reuters, May 22, 2019,
https://www.reuters.com/article/bc-finreg-gdpr-one-year-re-
port-card-part/data-privacy-and-gdpr-at-one-year-a-u-s-per-
spective-part-one-report-card-idUSKCN1SS2K5.
99 Ben Wolford, “What is GDPR, the EU’s New Data Protection
Law?, ” Proton Technologies, https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/.
100 “Data Governance, ” CSIS, https://datagovernance.csis.org/.
101 James Vincent, “Google Hit with €1.5 Billion Antitrust Fine
by EU, ” The Verge, March 20, 2019, https://www.theverge.
com/2019/3/20/18270891/google-eu-antitrust-fine-ad-
sense-advertising.
102 Eglantine Lioret and Valérie Farez, “INSIGHT: France’s
Digital Services Tax Goes Ahead, ” Bloomberg Tax, July 29,
2019, https://news.bloombergtax.com/daily-tax-report-inter-
national/insight-frances-digital-services-tax-goes-ahead-1;
and “Digital Services Tax, ” Her Majesty’s Revenue and
Customs, March 11, 2020, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/introduction-of-the-digital-services-tax/
digital-services-tax.
103 Rogier Creemers, Paul Triolo, and Graham Webster, “Transla-
tion: Cybersecurity Law of the People’s Republic of China
(Effective June 1, 2017), ” New America, June 29, 2018, https://
www.newamerica.org/cybersecurity-initiative/digichina/blog/
translation-cybersecurity-law-peoples-republic-china/; and
Murray Scot Tanner, “Beijing’s New National Intelligence
Law: From Defense to Offense, ” Lawfare, July 20, 2017,
https://www.lawfareblog.com/beijings-new-national-intelli-
gence-law-defense-offense.
104 Samm Sacks, “Beijing Wants to Rewrite the Rules of the
Internet, ” The Atlantic, June 18, 2018, https://www.theatlantic.
com/international/archive/2018/06/zte-huawei-china-trump-
trade-cyber/563033/.
105 “Comparing privacy laws: GDPR v. CCPA, ” Future of Privacy
Forum, Novermber 2018, https://fpf.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/GDPR_CCPA_Comparison-Guide.pdf.
106 “ Address by Under Secretary McIntosh at the Sim Kee Boon
Institute for Financial Economics at Singapore Management
University, ” U.S. Department of the Treasury, February 5,
2020, https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/
sm900#_edn1.
107 Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Zhiyao Lu, “Global E-Commerce
Talks Stumble on Data Issues, Privacy, and More, ” Peterson
Institue For International Economics, October 2019, https://
www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/pb19-14.pdf.
108 “G20 Osaka Leaders’ Declaration, ” Group of Twenty, retrieved
from Univerity of Toronto, June 29, 2019, http://www.g20.
utoronto.ca/2019/2019-g20-osaka-leaders-declaration.html.
109 Michael R. Pompeo, “ Announcing the Expansion of the
Clean Network to Safeguard America’s Assets, ” U.S.
Department of State, August 5, 2020, https://www.state.gov/
announcing-the-expansion-of-the-clean-network-to-safe -
guard-americas-assets/ .
Health, June 12, 2020, https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/
presentations/06122020ForeignInfluences.pdf.
85 Khan, Robbins, and Okrent, The State of Science and Engineer-
ing 2020.
86 Segal and Gerstel, Research Collaboration in an Age of
Strategic Competition.
87 Dylan Gerstel, Stephanie Segal, and Matthew P . Goodman,
“ Allied Economic Forum: Lessons Learned, ” CSIS, Critical
Questions, September 2019, https://www.csis.org/analysis/
allied-economic-forum-lessons-learned.
88 Jeremy White, “Japanese Government Revises Rules on
Foreign Investment, ” Baker McKenzie, November 14, 2019,
https://www.bakermckenzie.com/en/insight/publica-
tions/2019/11/japan-rules-on-foreign-investment; and
“Strengthening our National Security through Improved
Investment Review, ” German Federal Industry for Economic
Affairs and Energy, December 19, 2018, https://www.bmwi.
de/Redaktion/DE/Pressemitteilun-
gen/2018/20181219-staerkung-unserer-nationalen-sicherhe-
it-durch-verbesserte-investitionspruefung.html.
89 “Guidelines to Counter Foreign Interference in the Australian
University Sector Released, ” Australian Government
Department of Education, Skills, and Employment, Novem-
ber 14, 2019, https://www.education.gov.au/news/guide-
lines-counter-foreign-interference-australian-university-sec-
tor-released.
90 “Implementation of the February 2020 Australia Group
Intersessional Decisions: Addition of Certain Rigid-Walled,
Single-Use Cultivation Chambers and Precursor Chemicals to
the Commerce Control List, ” U.S. Department of Commerce
Bureau of Industry and Security, June 17, 2020, https://www.
federalregister.gov/documents/2020/06/17/2020-11625/
implementation-of-the-february-2020-australia-group-inters-
essional-decisions-addition-of-certain.
91 A notable example of export controls as a foreign policy goal are
anti-terrorism controls targeted at state sponsors of terrorism.
92 “Data is Giving Rise to a New Economy, ” The Economist, May
6, 2017, https://www.economist.com/briefing/2017/05/06/
data-is-giving-rise-to-a-new-economy.
93 James Manyika et al., Digial Globalizaion: The New Era of
Global Flows (New Y ork: McKinsey Global Institute, March
2016), https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/
Business%20Functions/McKinsey%20Digital/Our%20
Insights/Digital%20globalization%20The%20new%20
era%20of%20global%20flows/MGI-Digital-globaliza -
tion-Full-report.ashx .
94 James Manyika and Michael Chui, “By 2025, Internet of
Things Applications could have $11 Trillion Impact, ”
McKinsey Global Institute, July 22, 2015, https://www.
mckinsey.com/mgi/overview/in-the-news/by-2025-internet-
of-things-applications-could-have-11-trillion-impact.
95 Cisco, Cisco Annual Internet Report (2018–2023) (San Jose,
CA: March 2020), https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/
collateral/executive-perspectives/annual-internet-report/
white-paper-c11-741490.html.
96 Geoffrey A. Fowler, “One of the First Contact-Tracing Apps
Violates its Own Privacy Policy, ” Washington Post, May 21,
2020, https://www.washingtonpost.com/technolo-

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
SHARPENING AMERICAS INNOVATIVE EDGE / GOODMAN, GERSTEL
40
SECTION TITLE HERE capital-like funding to “research and technology development
in hardware-intensive capabilities that private industry has
not sufficiently supported to meet rapidly emerging defense
and national security needs. ” Robert D. Atkinson, “Emerging
Defense Technologies Need Funding to Cross ‘The Valley of
Death’ , ” Real Clear Defense, February 15, 2020, https://www.
realcleardefense.com/articles/2020/02/15/emerging_defense_
technologies_need_funding_to_cross_the_valley_of_
death_115045.html.
125 McCormick, Luftig, and Cunningham, “Economic Might,
National Security, and the Future of American Statecraft. ”
126 “Innovation Nation: An American Innovation Agenda for
2020, ” Business Roundtable.
127 “Ex-Im Bank Officials Float Possible Changes to Content
Policy for Tech Sector Financing, ” Inside U.S. Trade, May 15,
2020, https://insidetrade.com/daily-news/ex-im-bank-offi-
cials-float-possible-changes-content-policy-tech-sector-fi-
nancing.
128 Andrew Imbrie et al., “ Agile Alliances How the United States
and Its Allies Can Deliver a Democratic Way of AI, ” Center
for Security and Emerging Technology, February 2020,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/research/agile-alliances/.
129 Akira Oikawa, “Japan, US and Europe Team Up to Counter
China’s Quantum Rise, ” Nikkei Asian Review, December 18,
2019, https://asia.nikkei.com/Business/Technology/Japan-US-
and-Europe-team-up-to-counter-China-s-quantum-rise.
130 “Commerce Clears Way for U.S. Companies to More Fully
Engage in Tech Standards-Development Bodies, ” U.S.
Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security,
June 15, 2020, https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releas-
es/2020/06/commerce-clears-way-us-companies-more-fully-
engage-tech-standards.
131 “Emerging Technology and Research Technical Advisory
Committee, ” U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of
Industry and Security, July 2, 2012, https://www.bis.doc.gov/
index.php/licensing/28-technology-evaluation/147-emerg-
ing-technology-and-research-technical-advisory-committee.
132 Gerstel, Segal, and Goodman, “ Allied Economic Forum:
Lessons Learned. ”
133 Khari Johnson, “How Congress is Shaping Data Privacy Laws
During the Pandemic, ” Venturebeat, May 18, 2020, https://
venturebeat.com/2020/05/18/how-congress-is-shaping-data-
privacy-laws-during-the-pandemic/.
134 The nine countries participating in the APEC cross-border
privacy rules are Australia, Canada, Japan, Korea, Mexico, the
Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, and the United States.
135 Cory, “Cross-Border Data Flows: Where Are the Barriers, and
What Do They Cost?”
110 Chun Han Wong, “China Launches Initiative to Set Global
Data-Security Rules, ” Wall Street Journal, September 8, 2020,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/china-to-launch-initiative-to-
set-global-data-security-rules-11599502974.
111 While not as expansive as GDPR, the APEC Cross-Border
Privacy Rules authorize cross-border data transfers for
third-party organizations with equivalent protections (like
GDPR). For a full comparison of GDPR and APEC CBPR as
well as other regimes, see https://datagovernance.csis.org/.
112 “FACT SHEET on U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement, ” Office of the
U.S. Trade Representative, September 2019, https://ustr.gov/
about-us/policy-offices/press-office/fact-sheets/2019/
september/fact-sheet-us-japan-trade-agreement.
113 “European Commission Adopts Adequacy Decision on Japan,
Creating the World’s Largest Area of Safe Data Flows, ”
European Commission, January 23, 2019, https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_421.
114 Matthew P . Goodman, “Time to Align on Digital Gover-
nance, ” CSIS, Commentary, January 24, 2020, https://www.
csis.org/analysis/time-align-digital-governance.
115 Boroush, “U.S. R&D Increased by $32 Billion in 2017. ”
116 Richard Freeman and John Van Reenen, “What If Congress
Doubled R&D Spending on the Physical Sciences?, ” Innova-
tion Policy and the Economy 9, no. 1 (2009): 1-38, https://
www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/592419?seq=1#metadata_info_
tab_contents.
117 Jeff Brady, “ After Solyndra Loss, U.S. Energy Loan Program
Turning A Profit, ” NPR, November 13, 2014, https://www.npr.
org/2014/11/13/363572151/after-solyndra-loss-u-s-energy-
loan-program-turning-a-profit.
118 ITIF suggests expanding the Manufacturing USA network
from 15 institutes to closer to 45. Atkinson, “ The Case for a
National Industrial Strategy to Counter China’s Technologi -
c a l R i s e .”
119 In 2016, approximately 15 percent and 46 percent of S&E
bachelor’s degrees earned by blacks and Hispanics, respective-
ly, were from historically black colleges and universities and
high Hispanic enrollment institutions. Burke, “Science and
Engineering Labor Force. ”
120 Additional immigration recommendations are discussed in an
accompanying report, Preparing the Workforce for 2030: A
Pillar of Trade Leadership” , https://csis-website-prod.s3.
amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/201001_Rein-
schCaporal_TradeCommission_Workforce_2030.pdf
121 William Alan Reinsch et al., “Taking Stock of Government
Involvement in Research and Development: Assessing Public
R&D Effects, ” CSIS, June 2020, https://csis-website-prod.s3.
amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/200602_Rein-
sch_R%26D_v2.pdf.
122 For more detailed proposals on a revived OTA, see Robert D.
Atkinson, “ A Fresh Start for the OTA, ” Information Technolo-
gy and Innovation Foundation, February 21, 2020, http://
www2.itif.org/2020-fresh-start-ota.pdf.
123 Atkinson, “The Case for a National Industrial Strategy to
Counter China’s Technological Rise. ”
124 The 2019 NDAA authorized $75 million to the National
Security Investment Capital program to offer venture

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
1616 Rhode Island Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
202 887 0200 | www.csis.org
