
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Position paper

Innovation system – thinking broader: Five
theses addressing innovation policy for a
new understanding of innovation systems

Conclusions from the initial research at Fraunhofer ISI

Fraunhofer Institute for Systems
and Innovation Research ISI

 © own draft Fraunhofer ISI
Karlsruhe
October 2016

Knut Koschatzky, Stephanie Daimer, Jonathan Köhler,
Ralf Lindner, Lisa Nabitz, Patrick Plötz, Rainer Walz, Philine Warnke

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
| 1
Developing the innovation systems approach further –
Strengthening the ISI core competence "Understanding the in-
novation system"

Since the foundation of the Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research
(Fraunhofer ISI) in 1972 the concept of the innovation system in its national, regional,
sectoral and technological manifestations has constituted a fundamental foundation of
thinking and core competence of the Institute. While until the end of the 1980s the con-
cept was enshrined rather implicitly in the work of Fraunhofer ISI, since the beginning of
the 1990s a diffusion of this approach has even extended to politics, incorporating new
insights from national and international innovation research. To begin with, innovation
policy was taken up by the European Commission and a few Scandinavian countries such
as Sweden, today innovation policy without taking into account the systemic perspective
and the objective to support networking between organizations on the international,
national and regional level, is almost inconceivable. The graphic heuristics of the innova-
tion system which has entrenched itself in the consciousness of many scientists and polit-
ically active persons, is based on work which has been done at Fraunhofer ISI. According-
ly an innovation system is created from several sub-sectors (industrial system, research
system, system of the intermediaries, political system) and influenced by framework
conditions such as infrastructure, demand and institutions. Innovations are understood
as being organizational as well as technological and are based on research and develop-
ment.

In the work of Fraunhofer ISI it has been recognized in recent years that changes in the
understanding of innovation, particularly with a view to societal demands on innovation
as well as the development of new or so far neglected groups of actors which have an
impact on innovation processes, require a new perspective of the concept of the innova-
tion system. Initial activities on this are reflected in the publication for the 40th anniver-
sary of the Fraunhofer ISI in 2012 with the title "Innovation system revisited – Experienc-
es from 40 years of Fraunhofer ISI research". In the year 2014 it was decided to go a step
further and to fundamentally review the innovation system concept from different scien-
tific perspectives. For this purpose a self-financed initial research project across the insti-
tute was created in order to significantly strengthen the core competence "Understand-
ing the innovation system" of Fraunhofer ISI. This was done interdisciplinary and across
Competence Centers in five sub-projects, coordinated by a superior project manage-
ment: 1. understanding innovation and actors in innovation systems, 2. further develop-
ment and dynamization of the concept of sectoral and technological innovation systems,
3. developing an approach to measure the impact of policy instruments on the diffusion
of innovations using the example of energy efficiency in industry, 4. outlining a system
dynamic model of the dynamics of innovation systems as well as 5. new approaches to
the governance in innovation systems. Insights, which were gained in these projects, are
summarized and illustrated in the form of five theses.1

1 The new innovation system concept consisting of the three dimensions ‘innovation supply and de-
mand‘, ‘innovation input‘ and ‘innovation framework conditions‘ is shown on the title page.

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
| 2

1
New actors and organizations, which are neither
sufficiently considered by the traditional innovation
system concept nor by politics, influence the inno-
vation process

For several years, the high degree of relevance of phenomena such as social inno-
vation, collaborative innovation and user innovation have been increasingly no-
ticed. Examples are Open Source Innovation, jointly created Wikis, repair cafés and
many more. The emergence of new intermediates such as collaboration platforms
and clusters, the direct and indirect influence of civil society groups on innovation,
its diffusion and prevention and the growing significance of philanthropists in the
shape of private persons and enterprises are related to this. The traditional innova-
tion system perspective does not take these developments into account as the new
actors and their functions which are relevant to innovation cannot be located in the
subsystems defined there. From an innovation policy perspective, new forms of
innovation, new actors, their functions and impacts have to be included in a reflec-
tion of the innovation process as otherwise a part of the innovation landscape
which is becoming increasingly more relevant and its social and economic effec-
tiveness is left out. This results in the challenge for innovation policy that many of
the new actors are organized informally and policies geared to formal organizations
reach their limits. In addition, these types of innovations demand new forms of
supporting infrastructures such as platforms and property rights for the open ex-
change of innovation approaches.

2
A clear allocation of actors to functions in the inno-
vation system is no longer possible. Multi dimen-
sional challenges aggravate innovation political de-
sign

Actors can perceive different functions in the innovation process. In early phases of
the innovation process they are active in searching for new knowledge while they
act close to the market in later phases. For example, social actors can no longer be
reduced to the role of the consumer but rather they actively contribute to innova-
tions by actively generating knowledge and innovative ideas as well as by other
functions such as financing (crowdfunding). It is essential for a transformative inno-
vation policy, which is oriented towards the big societal challenges, to recognize in
a broad perspective the interdependencies between regimes (established innova-
tion paths) and niches (search process for new knowledge) to identify the functions
of actors, who to some extent act multi-dimensionally (equally in niches, regimes
and different stages of maturity), in order to initiate and promote search processes
in niches in terms of policy design.

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
| 3

3
Radical innovations emerge in niches. Niches and
their actors can be positioned nationally and inter-
nationally

New ideas are developed in niches and implemented for the first time. A transition
towards a new regime is possible when niches generate innovations, grow and re-
place regimes or change through radical innovations. Niches and their actors can be
positioned across technologies as well as internationally. In addition, often not only
technological but social and organizational innovations are at the center of a niche.
Innovation policy support measures contributing to transition management should
therefore take the international dimension into account. They should also not so
much draw on already existing technologies, but should in a systemic and cross-
technological perspective support opening processes in niches. This can be done
for example in the form of a 'plea' through legal changes. This also includes taking
innovation relevant framework conditions into account. National and international
regulations which are geared towards existing technological systems and have here
an impact which supports innovations can impede new developments in niches
(e.g. decentralized energy supply systems require other regulations than central
systems). Through market selection subsequent consolidations are possible, which
either result in the disappearance of the niche or in its strengthening in such a way
that a transition towards a new regime takes place.

4
In order to recognize niches and their future rele-
vance, strategic intelligence is necessary which can
not be made available by so far dominant discourse
formats and search processes

Often innovation policy discourse and participation formats are geared towards
established organizations. The role of 'change agents', often not formally organized
and who drive innovations in niches, is not taken into account. New search and
analysis processes are needed to identify 'change agents' and to measure the de-
velopment, significance and degree of maturity of niches and 'change agents'. New
search processes and new analytical tools are needed, which do not orientate
themselves on existing sector and technology classifications but follow an open
search mode. Approaches are creative, structured foresight processes, which spe-
cifically scrutinize the traditional actor configurations and perspectives. Systematic
screening processes such as social media analysis, text mining or Web crawling, can
support the underlying opening actors and system analyses. In innovation policy,
relevant information facilitates the recognition and strengthening of the relevance
of niches.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
| 4

5
New forms of innovations and new demands on in-
novation require new forms of policies in the sense
of a mixture of reflection and policy experiments

The point of view of innovation policy which has been dominant in the last few
decades that innovation has a value in itself, is increasingly criticized. Today innova-
tion policy increasingly faces the challenge to influence the innovation process in
socially desired directions. Closely associated with this is the demand for an explicit
orientation towards far reaching societal problems which need to be addressed by
cross-sector systemic approaches. To be successful in this respect, research and
innovation oriented decisions have to be opened for additional perspectives. Re-
flexive processes are needed in order to identify societal needs. The origin of key
subjects and prioritization has to be transparent. An important characteristic of
such processes is transparency about who gets involved in such processes. Accessi-
bility should also be ensured; in particular such processes should include new ac-
tors who have so far not been organized, outsiders and lateral thinkers (e.g. patient
groups, transition towns, globalization-critical movements) and bring them togeth-
er with the groups which so far have participated. This means a new quality of par-
ticipation in order to pick up developments beyond already known paths and in-
volve in political processes. The complexity of such processes which results from
the social interactions, the uncertainty of future developments and the necessity of
a consistent approach demands an experimental approach. Reflexive processes and
political experiments are approaches which should be used more strongly than up
to now by innovation policy to develop innovation policy strategies in the sense of
facilitating inclusive goal finding and transition.

Further information

The results of the five sub-projects have been documented in working papers.
Link:
http://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/isi-en/p/publikationen/diskpap_innosysteme_policyanalyse.php
Working papers No 48 to 52
