
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92

From sustainability transitions to security: Mapping
the new terrain for innovation policy

Paula Kivimaaa,b, Matthijs Janssenc, Jakob Edlerd,e

Place: Karlsruhe
Date: February 2026

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
a Finnish Environment Institute Syke, Helsinki, Finland
b Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom
c Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands
d Fraunhofer ISI, Karlsruhe, Germany
e Manchester Institute of Innovation Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom

Responsible for content
Paula Kivimaa, paula.kivimaa@syke.fi; Matthijs Janssen, m.j.janssen@uu.nl; Jakob Edler, jakob.edler@isi.fraunho-
fer.de
Recommended citation
Kivimaa, P.; Janssen, M.; Edler, J. (2026): From sustainability transitions to security: Mapping the new terrain for
innovation policy , (Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92). Karlsruhe:
Fraunhofer ISI.
Published
February 2026
ISSN
1612-1430
Doi
10.24406/publica-7632

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Contents
Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction.................................................................................................................... 2
2 Rise and characteristics of challenge-led innovation policy .............................. 5
2.1 Evolving context and objectives of innovation policy ............................................................. 5
2.2 Imperatives for challenge-led innovation policy ...................................................................... 6
3 Security and geopolitics in the context of innovation policy ............................ 9
3.1 Security and securitisation .............................................................................................................. 9
3.2 Geopolitics of science and innovation ....................................................................................... 10
3.3 Emerging debate on open strategic autonomy and technology sovereignty.................. 11
4 Synergies and tensions brought by security as a new objective for
challenge-led innovation policy .............................................................................. 13
4.1 Directionality .................................................................................................................................... 13
4.2 Experimentation and deep learning ........................................................................................... 15
4.3 Inclusivity and diversity ................................................................................................................. 15
4.4 Regime destabilisation and phase-out ...................................................................................... 16
4.5 Comprehensive and adaptive policy mix .................................................................................. 17
5 Discussion ..................................................................................................................... 18
5.1 Three broad policy strategies ...................................................................................................... 20
5.2 Avenues for further research ....................................................................................................... 22
6 Conclusions.................................................................................................................. 24
Acknowledgements ...................................................................................................................25
References ...................................................................................................................................26

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | II

Figure and Tables

Table 1: Imperatives of challenge-led innovation policy .................................................................... 7
Table 2: Summary of synergies and tensions between challenge-led innovation
policy and security. ......................................................................................................................... 18

Figure 1: Four possible scenarios for further evolution of the innovation policy
field ....................................................................................................................................................... 22

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 1
Abstract
Increasing rise of military and non-military security issues, globally, influences innovation policies and
interacts with policy aspirations to address societal challenges, notably around sustainability transi-
tions. Drawing from research on security, geopolitics, and transformative and mission-oriented inno-
vation policy, we map out what an increased focus on security means for challenge-led innovation
policymaking. The analysis is structured around five policy imperatives: directionality, experimenta-
tion, inclusivity, regime destabilisation, and policy mix adaptation. Some clear synergies exist be-
tween sustainability and security, e.g., directing innovation support towards technologies that reduce
supply chain dependencies, or dual-use technologies that improve resource efficiency and defence
capability. Tensions also exist, e.g. security-risks of smart ‘clean’ technologies, or making innovation
processes more closed for security reasons. Three broad policy strategies to govern the interrelations
between security and sustainability objectives in innovation policy are proposed. The contribution
raises awareness and provides nuance regarding ways the rising security concerns influence chal-
lenge-led innovation policy.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 2
1 Introduction
Recently, we have seen the increasing rise of security and geopolitics issues in the context of science,
technology and innovation (STI) policies. This is not a new topic for STI policies (McLeish and Nightin-
gale, 2007; Zervos and Siegel, 2008), but one that was on the backburner for most of 2010s when STI
policies increasingly embraced the challenge of climate change and other societal grand challenges
(Schot and Steinmueller, 2018a). Due to the increasing geopolitical turbulence of the 2020s, especially
since Russia invaded parts of Ukraine in 2022, security as a topic has made a strong comeback to the
innovation policy agenda. This focus inevitably interacts with the ongoing aspiration of innovation
policies to be challenge -led and address societal problems, especially towards sustainability transi-
tions. Moreover, it also interacts with the increasingly strong demands on STI policy to enhance com-
petitiveness and lead to value added. Just how the securitisation of policy concerns interacts with
competitiveness and environmental sustainability in the context of STI (innovation) policy is a major
concern of policymakers and analysts alike.
This paper aims to explore synergies and tensions between the sustainability transition and security
objectives in the context of innovation policymaking, the former framed via the lens of challenge-led
innovation policy. In discussing the analysis, we also reflect upon the traditional and underlying objec-
tive: competitiveness.
Security as a concept is multi -dimensional, having undergone broadening from purely military and
state-oriented threats to, for example, environmental and human security (Peoples and Vaughan-Wil-
liams, 2015) and deepening by elaborations of positive and negative security (Hoogensen Gjørv, 2012;
Roe, 2008). In line with the broadening of security discourse, we also understand security here in a
broader sense, encompassing both military and non-military issues, extending to societal resilience. In
policymaking, security has recently and occasionally been linked to other concepts, such as autonomy
or sovereignty, and sectors such as energy, health and provision of many commodities (i.e. security of
supply).
Although specific discussions on security in innovation policy have in many places resulted from the
events in 2022, there were signs of more protectionist developments triggered by system competition
and growing distrust between different global regions already in the 2010s. Besides increasing efforts
to secure critical infrastructure and raise dual-use technologies into discussion, examples include pol-
icies on strategic autonomy in the EU (Miró, 2023) and the rise of new industrial policy and protectionist
policies in the United States (US) (Juhász et al., 2024; Steinberg and Tan, 2023). Our focus of interest in
this paper is the EU, while developments elsewhere have also shaped how the EU considers security in
innovation policymaking. The debate on security and strategic autonomy has been intense on the EU
level compared to the member state level (in many places). In the EU, open strategic autonomy (OSA)
as a political concept, was initiated in the defence and foreign policy context but has since spread, for
example, to concern energy and industrial policies, with an objective to safeguard the EU’s independ-
ence from other countries (Edler, 2024; Kivimaa and Rogge, 2024).1
The financial crisis of 2008 dramatically reduced foreign direct investment and gave rise to populist
politics in Europe and the US, questioning the long-term trend of internationalisation that had lasted

1 OSA has been defined as ‘the capacity of a country or region to pursue strategically important activities free of foreign interference’ where adding
‘open’ to the term emphasises global interdependencies and the importance of international partnerships (Kroll, 2024, p. 4).

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 3
several decades (Leijten, 2019). Russian gas disruptions to Ukraine in 2006 and 2009, and invasion of
Crimea in 2014, were signs of military and energy -related security threats. The early 2020s disruptive
events, the Covid-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of parts of Ukraine leading to a renewed sense
of vulnerability and an energy price crisis in Europe, led to new ‘emergency’ policies such as the Re-
covery and Resilience Framework (RRF) (European Commission, 2020) and RePower EU (EC, 2022). The
RRF was initially used as a tool to promote the economic recovery of the EU from the pandemic. It was
subsequently expanded to support energy transition and energy security as part of the RePower EU
policy.2 During the 2020s, the EU has tried to increasingly address supply disruption risks related to
critical raw materials (EC, 2020) and semi-conductors (Trippl et al., 2024), and sabotage of critical en-
ergy and data infrastructure interconnections between EU member states.
Since around 2020, academic attention began to slowly turn towards the links of innovation policy to
security, sovereignty and autonomy. Most often, those contributions focused on how countries and,
more explicitly even, the EU, can safeguard their sovereign development and use of critical technolo-
gies in the wake of systems competition (Bauer and Erixon, 2020; Caravella et al., 2021; Crespi et al.,
2021; da Ponte et al., 2023; March and Schieferdecker, 2023) , emphasising the importance of cross -
border collaboration in innovation processes and the continued attention to global sustainability chal-
lenges (Edler et al., 2023; Leijten, 2019).
Against this background, we argue that security-related and geopolitical considerations have comple-
mented the rationales for innovation policymaking: This new focus has severe implications for innova-
tion policy as it has been developing in the last decade. Thus, security, as a rationale, needs to be
balanced with addressing environmental and social problems (from here on referred to shortly as “sus-
tainability”) as well as competitiveness.
Currently, when security and geopolitics have seeped into the domain of innovation policy, govern-
ments around Europe and the EU itself are still grappling with new forms of challenge-led innovation
policies – or have even incurred a backlash to previous progress with sustainability transitions . Chal-
lenge-led policies are such that go beyond mere R&D investments and economic growth, and also
support the development and diffusion of innovations to tackle urgent but persistent sustainability
challenges, often expressed in terms of UN Sustainable Development Goals (Kuhlmann and Rip, 2018;
Laatsit et al., 2025) . This kind of policy shift is , or was, manifested in the widespread attention for
transformative and mission-oriented innovation policies, which provide new frameworks for engaging
public and private innovation actors to pursue shared societal goals (Janssen et al., 2021; Schot and
Steinmueller, 2018a).
So far, little is known about how the simultaneous developments towards sustainability-led and secu-
rity-aware innovation policies interconnect (Kivimaa, 2022). For instance, innovation-driven sustaina-
bility transitions can both respond to and create shifts in material dependencies (for businesses and
countries) with geopolitical and security implications. Geopolitical conflicts also change the short-term
landscape for many industries and systems in transition (Wiertz et al., 2023), calling for both anticipa-
tory and reflexive policies (Wiarda et al., 2024) . Such ‘landscape shocks’ can create new windows of
opportunity for transformative innovation. Alternatively, they may halt ongoing transitions and bring
stronger support for established socio-technical systems. Sometimes both happen in parallel.

2 While some member states have used the RRF to support challenge -led innovation policy (Kivimaa et al., 2023), overall, there have been strong dis-
parities between EU member states in the content, process and transformative value of emergency policies (Schwa ag Serger et al., 2023).

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 4
Drawing from security studies, research on geopolitics and innovation policy studies, especially litera-
tures on transformative and mission -oriented innovation policy, we will map out and discuss what
increased focus on military and non -military security, and negative and positive security, mean for
challenge-led innovation policy.
Our research questions are:
• What does a broad take on security mean for challenge-led innovation policy?
• What kind of synergies and tensions does security have with the features of challenge-led inno-
vation policy?
This paper is a conceptual exploration of a novel topic, based on a review of different sets of literatures
at the cross-section of innovation policy studies and of security studies and international relations. We
conducted an integrative review3 on this emerging topic which “benefit[s] from holistic conceptualisa-
tion and synthesis of the literature to date” (Torraco, 2005, p. 357) . Empirical references are made
explicitly to the EU context.
First, the paper starts, in Section 2, with a brief overview of the history of innovation policy in Europe.
In this context, challenge-led innovation policy is described via the evolution of three frames of inno-
vation policy towards the transformative lens, and five ‘imperatives’ drawing from mission-oriented
and transformative innovation policies are presented. Subsequently, in Section 3, security is defined
and the history of security and geopolitics in innovation policy is reviewed, ending with the recently
emerging debate in the European Union (EU) on strategic autonomy and technology sovereignty to
provide an important context for our analysis. What then follows in Section 4 is an analysis of synergies
and tensions with challenge -led innovation policy, when security is introduced as a new policy ra-
tionale. The discussion, in Section 5, summarises the analysis, and presents three broad strategies and
avenues for further research. Section 6 concludes.

3 The initial literature review, described in Section 3, used the research databases Scopus and Google Scholar for academic literature. The search terms
for Scopus were: ( TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "innovation polic*" ) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ( security ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( geopolitic* ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (
geoeconomic* ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "strategic autonomy" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "technology sovereignty" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "technological
sovereignty" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "international relations" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "defence" ) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ( "defense" )). This was conducted
7 January 2025, resulting in 227 hits. Google Scholar was searched for publications on relevant sub -topics, e.g. “geopolitics of science” and “geopoli-
tics of innovation”. We also searched for relevant reports published, e.g., by th e European Commission and the OECD. This method matches with the
emerging character of the topic of security in the context of (challenge -led) innovation policy, where much information continues to be published in
the form of ‘grey’ reports and scientific studies.

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 5
2 Rise and characteristics of challenge-led innovation policy
2.1 Evolving context and objectives of innovation policy
To put current security-related innovation policy pressures in perspective, we briefly recount the de-
velopments of the STI policy field towards challenge -led perspectives (e.g. Boon and Edler, 2018;
Fagerberg, 2018; Kuhlmann and Rip, 2018). The historical overview of innovation policy by Schot and
Steinmueller (2018a) shows that evolutions in the legitimacy, scope and nature of innovation policy
result from at least three interrelated factors: advances in research on innovation processes and policy
support (our knowledge about innovation policy); major changes in the geography and impacts of
technologies and economic activities (the reality in which innovation policy is situated); and shifts in
societal priorities and concerns (expectations towards innovation policy outcomes).
Innovation policy originated after the second World War, although then framed differently as science
and technology policy. Schot and Steinmueller (2018a) call it the first frame of innovation policy, ori-
ented to growth, mass production and consumption, to help economic recovery during the post-war
period. Science was hoped to help maintain peace and generate industrial profits (Schot and
Steinmueller, 2018a). In the US, national security was one objective for post -war innovation policy
(Lundvall and Borrás, 2005).
A period of tension between the US and Soviet Union until 1990, known as the “Cold War”, contributed
to defence R&D and formation of national innovation systems (Mowery, 2012), such systems called as
second frame of innovation policy (Schot and Steinmueller, 2018a). The innovation systems approach
gained prominence during the 1980s-1990s as a response to the perceived limitations of frame 1 pol-
icies. It highlights interactions and network formation between different actors and institutions (firms,
universities, government organisations, end -users) and technology transfer to stimulate innov ation
development and diffusion (Schot and Steinmueller, 2018a).
After the Cold War, economic growth and competitiveness became the main agenda for innovation
policy in many countries, although military R&D also took place. In the 1990s, while growth-orientation
took the front stage of innovation policy, the European Commission coordinated telecoms and IT re-
search programmes that funded dual-use developments, alongside pursuits towards defence industrial
policy (Edler and James, 2015; Martins and Mawdsley, 2021). From 2000 onwards, defence sector R&D
was officially kept separate from more general innovation policy. However, terrorist actions increased
focus on internal security, enabling R&D spending contributing to the defence sector. For example,
the security research programme, forming part of the EU’s 7th Framework Programme during 2007-
2013, was framed in terms of civilian purposes and internal security; it prevented defence and military
technology funding, but allowed funding for dual-use developments and had close interests with de-
fence companies (Martins and Mawdsley, 2021).
Broadly, there has been a gradual development that has at least unofficially increased security orien-
tation in EU innovation developments. However, since 2022, military security has made a stronger
comeback to the policy agenda. Because “contemporary defence decisions increasingly depend on
technological advancements and R&D they become enmeshed with industrial and innovation policies”;
for instance, the European Defence Fund established in 2017 is a part of EU industrial policy (Martins
and Mawdsley, 2021, p. 1458).

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 6
The economic growth agenda of innovation policy has led to major environmental problems, such as
climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss, being the reason for the challenge-led innovation pol-
icy agenda (Kivimaa, 2022), named as the third frame of innovation policy (Schot and Steinmueller,
2018a). Although frames 1 and 2 can be agnostic about the direction of innovation (Lundvall, 2024)
and are insufficient to stimulate system innovation (Geels, 2005), for the third generation of innovation
policy addressing persistent or grand societal challenges i s an explicit objective (Kuhlmann and Rip,
2018). Academic propositions for frame 3 innovation policy emphasise transformative change of entire
socio-economic and socio-technical systems. As a rationale for innovation policy, it builds directly on
Weber and Rohracher’s (2012) notions of transformative system failures (expanding the market and
system failures legitimising frame 1 and 2, respectively), highlighting several factors that keep innova-
tion systems from driving system change. Examples are directionality and policy coordination failures
that prevent synergetic innovation efforts needed to enable systemic change. While many would likely
subscribe to the objective of targeting innovation policy at societal challenges, difficulties exist around
actual policy development, implementation and evaluation (Haddad et al., 2022; Laatsit et al., 2025).
During the ongoing attempts to shape challenge-led innovation policies, societies concerned with ge-
opolitical tensions are currently witnessing a come-back of the competitiveness objective (Cincera et
al., 2025; Mariotti, 2024), contributing to the revival of industrial policy (Barbieri Góes and Viesti, 2025;
Juhász et al., 2024). Among the most notable developments is the Draghi report (Draghi, 2024), com-
missioned by the European Commission, on the future of European competitiveness. The proposed
competitiveness strategy seeks to simultaneously address technological, environmental and geopolit-
ical challenges through coordinated policies and substantial investments. This involves coupling inno-
vation and technological advancements, and industrial policy and investment, with strategic autonomy
and economic security. In response to these recommendations, the European Commission proposed
its Competitiveness Compass framework in January 2025. Its three pillars comprise closing the inno-
vation gap, reducing excessive dependencies and increasing security, and decarbonisation and com-
petitiveness (EC, 2025).
2.2 Imperatives for challenge-led innovation policy
We propose a set of main imperatives for challenge-led innovation policy that have been identified as
essential for the governance of transformative innovation policy (TIP) and mission-oriented innovation
policy (MIP), and that we later use to reflect on synergies and tensions between security and sustain-
ability in this context. Elaborated views on relevant features can be found in the two prominent litera-
tures of TIP and MIP.
TIP is closely aligned with Schot and Steinmueller’s (2018a) third frame of innovation policy and Weber
and Rohracher’s (2012) concept of transformative system failures. Its central perspectives on driving
system transformation are grounded in science -technology-society studies, socio-technical systems
theory and sustainability transitions literature, particularly the multi-level perspective. While the debate
on TIP harbours variety (Diercks et al., 2019), studies operationalising TIP underscore the significance
of participatory approaches and involving diverse stakeholders and communities in innovation pro-
cesses (Boni et al., 2025; Clement et al., 2025; Molas-Gallart et al., 2021). Innovation, within this context,
is understood technologically and socially (Edler et al., 2024), and to encompass institutional innova-
tions aimed at eliminating harmful practices that obstruct sustainable alternatives (Haddad et al., 2022).
MIP, in contrast, emerged from fields of innovation economics, innovation studies, political economy,
and public policy and governance research. Its revival was heralded with a special issue in Research

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 7
Policy (Foray et al., 2012), and Mazzucato’s ideas of the (entrepreneurial) role of the state in advancing
innovation (e.g. Mazzucato, 2015). In 2018, this culminated into a proposal for the European Commis-
sion’s next R&D framework programme (Mazzucato, 2018a), which also sparked MIP at (sub)national
levels (Larrue, 2021; Uyarra et al., 2025). The governance modes and policy instruments deemed suit-
able for MIP depend on how MIP is understood, alternative interpretations leaning towards science
policy, industrial and entrepreneurship policy or transformative policy (Janssen et al., 2023; Larrue,
2021; Wittmann et al., 2021). Over time, the debate on MIP has increasingly incorporated views from
adjacent fields such as transition studies (Hekkert et al., 2020; Wittmann et al., 2021) and responsible
research and innovation (Wiarda et al., 2024).
Although TIP and MIP are sometimes equalled to each other, they do not necessarily overlap (Schot
and Steinmueller, 2018b) : TIP can exist without missions and MIPs are not always transformative
(Janssen et al., 2025, 2021). Accordingly, the related but distinct literatures emphasise slightly different
policy imperatives and practices. The available frameworks share some commonalities (e.g., direction-
ality is always covered), but not all (e.g., phasing-out generally receives less attention). With the aim to
be comprehensive but parsimonious, we have combined the key features of TIP and MIP into chal-
lenge-led innovation policy imperatives, using Nordling’s (2024) typology of goals, knowledge dynam-
ics, actors, strategies and institutions as a broad frame, as shown in Table 1. The imperatives reflect
those principles that the vast academic literature on TIP and MIP has identified as being both essential
for effective governance of TIP and MIP and as posing the highest challenges for governments to
modify their traditional modes of innovation policymaking. Further elaboration of the imperatives fol-
lows in Section 4, as part of the analysis of synergies and tensions between security and sustainability
as objectives for innovation policy.
Table 1: Imperatives of challenge-led innovation policy
Imperative Description Example references TIP Example references MIP
Goals:
Directionality
The intentional and pro-active guidance
or steering of innovation processes, and
trajectories, toward specific societal goals.
This includes, e.g., (facilitating) vision cre-
ation, pathways and/or missions.
Weber & Rohracher 2012;
Grillitsch et al. 2019;
Haddad et al. 2022; Parks
2022; Bergek et al. 2023
Mazzucato 2018b; Larrue
2021; Wanzenböck et al.
2020; Wittmann et al.
2021; Janssen et al. 2023
Knowledge dy-
namics:
Experimentation
and deep learn-
ing
The deliberate and often iterative real-
world testing of new ideas, innovations,
policies, and governance approaches,
with the aim to acquire, integrate and
share insights into system factors (incl. in-
stitutional) affecting development and
diffusion possibilities. This includes pro-
cesses of second-order learning and un-
learning.
Weber & Rohracher 2012;
Grillitsch et al. 2019;
Ghosh et al. 2021; Haddad
et al. 2022; Borrás &
Schwaag Serger 2023
Mazzucato 2018b; Kattel
& Mazzucato 2018;
Wanzenböck et al. 2020;
Larrue 2021; Janssen et al.
2023; Elzinga et al. 2023
Actors:
Inclusivity and
diversity
The integration of diverse actors, per-
spectives, and interests into innovation
and policy processes to build trust and
engagement, and to ensure that the ben-
efits of innovations are distributed equita-
bly across society.
Kuhlmann & Rip 2018;
Ghosh et al. 2021; Haddad
et al. 2022; Borrás &
Schwaag Serger 2023;
Grillitsch et al. 2019
Mazzucato 2018b;
Wanzenböck et al. 2020;
Wittmann et al. 2021;
Janssen et al. 2023; Nylén
et al. 2023; Wiarda et al.
2023, 2024

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 8
Imperative Description Example references TIP Example references MIP
Strategies:
Regime destabi-
lisation and
phase-out
The resistance-removing processes by
which existing socio-technical systems are
disrupted (e.g. challenging and taxing un-
desirable practices, compensating losers),
thereby improving opportunities for new
innovations to emerge and diffuse.
Grillitsch et al. 2019;
Ghosh et al. 2021;
Molas-Gallart et al. 2021
Hekkert et al. 2020;
Klerkx & Begemann 2020;
Elzinga et al. 2023
Institutions:
Comprehensive
and adaptive
policy mix
The coordinated and flexible use of a di-
verse set of policy objectives, instruments
and processes (including supply and de-
mand side policies) to drive systemic
change across multiple sectors or do-
mains. This includes the coordination
across governmental departments and re-
sponsibilities.
Weber & Rohracher 2012;
Haddad et al. 2022;
Borrás & Schwaag Serger
2023; Santos & Coad 2023
Kattel & Mazzucato 2018;
Larrue 2021; Wittmann et
al. 2021; Janssen et al.
2023
Source: Based on own research.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 9
3 Security and geopolitics in the context of innovation policy
Security and geopolitics in relation to challenge -led innovation polic y is an emerging topic. Hence,
little published academic literature existed on it at the time of writing of this paper. Empirically, most
discussion around innovation policy and security has focused on the energy and digital sectors, while
discussions using alternative or related terms of technology policy and industrial policy reveal also
discussions around defence.
This section introduces the concept of security in the context of innovation and innovation policy (sub-
section 3.1), alongside other related concepts, including geopolitics (sub-section 3.2), strategic auton-
omy and technology sovereignty (sub -section 3.3). A thorough u nderstanding of these concepts is
essential for analysing the synergies and tensions between security and sustainability.
3.1 Security and securitisation
Reacting to the geopolitical turmoil and other security developments during this decade, the renewed
focus on security and securitisation intensifies societal concerns like resource availability and security
of supply chains; security of operation of technical systems ; climate and environmental security; and
internal stability within states. To respond meaningfully to those demands, it is important to compre-
hend the nature of the security risks and the meaning of securitisation in the policy debate. Securit y
risks can be of different scope and scale. International, cross-border risks include: resource flow dis-
ruptions, trade conflicts, military interventions/wars and data colonialism. Risks that often occur more
locally or nationally relate to system failures, societal tensions and frictions, violence , terrorism and
even collapsing state administrations. In addition, there are security risks which can be of local or cross-
border character, such as infrastructure damage, environmental disasters, health epidemics, economic
or financial crashes, cyber-attacks, and spread of disinformation.
Traditional security studies originated from discussions of military security and states as unit of analysis
(or referent objects as security studies frames it) (Buzan et al., 1998). Over time the field expanded to
other sectors and referent objects, considering, for instance, human and environmental security (Peo-
ples and Vaughan-Williams, 2015). With increasing digitalisation of societies and the rapid develop-
ment of artificial intelligence, cyber and data security have become of heightening concern for states
and business actors alike. Besides the state-oriented ‘hard’ security perspectives coiled under the term
‘negative security’ (Hoogensen Gjørv, 2012), several scholars have talked about positive security as a
complementary framing. Positive security is about how people experience security or ‘freedom from
insecurity’, emancipation, and empowering people and communities (Booth, 2007; Hoogensen Gjørv,
2012; Hoogensen Gjørv and Bilgic, 2022; Roe, 2008).
The current debate further intensifies a tension emanating from an increased concern with security
expressed in the political discourse, which has been conceptualised as securitisation. The Copenhagen
School of International Relations has referred to the concept of securitisation in relation to the impli-
cations of using the security-term on nonmilitary issues (Peoples and Vaughan-Williams, 2015). More
specifically, securitisation is described as a political act (Buzan et al., 1998) or a speech act with political
consequences (Hansen, 2012). In practice, this can mean moving an issue from normal politics to the
realm of security politics, which according to Floyd (2019) implies a reduction of democracy. Securiti-
sation has also been described in terms of adopting extraordinary measures which break normal po-
litical practices, move decision-making power from ministries to agencies, and limit information from

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 10
the public (Heinrich and Szulecki, 2018) . While securitisation has generally a negative undertone, it
may also result in positive implications, such as raising the importance of climate change on the polit-
ical agenda (see Dupont, 2019) and the comparison of the severity of climate change to other security
issues (see Berling et al., 2021). Desecuritisation, instead, means shifting issues out of the emergency
mode (Hansen, 2012). This can result in either the issue becoming politicised or depoliticised, the latter
involving risks of “marginalisation of urgent and serious issues” (Trombetta, 2009, p. 589).
3.2 Geopolitics of science and innovation
Geopolitics concern the interaction between geographical factors, politics and international relations.
The literature on geopolitics is divided into classical realist geopolitics which is focused on the effect
of geographical factors between states and st ates’ needs to secure territorial access and resources
(Blondeel et al., 2021), and critical geopolitics that investigates how geographical assumptions influ-
ence global politics (Kuus, 2017). It is intertwined with questions of international trade and security via
both concrete changes in relations between states and experts’ perceptions about ongoing and future
events. International dynamics, such as changes to global value chains, material constraints, and global
competition, impose challenges for innovation policies (Kivimaa et al., 2022). For instance, related to
geopolitical and technological changes taking place, trade relations will be increasingly influenced by
many critical factors, such as technology and intellectual property rights, manufacturing and innova-
tion capabilities of states, labour and skills, and capital costs of decarbonisation and electrification
(IRENA, 2024).
Until the 2010s-2020s, the world experienced an increasing trend in international academic collabora-
tion, mostly viewed positively (Schwaag Serger and Shih, 2024). The shift in the economic and political
environment towards geopolitisation of science and innovation has led to techno-geopolitical uncer-
tainty. Luo and Van Assche (2023) describe this kind of uncertainty as “the propensity of disruptions
caused by significant policy changes taken by powerful nation states who seek interlocked techno -
nationalist and geopolitical gains vis-à-vis rival states”. This has put a system that by nature is oriented
to expanding knowledge and creating opportunities and where “everybody would be a winner”
(Leijten, 2019) under pressure. Currently, international scientific and technological collaboration con-
nected to the post-World War II liberal international order – based on openness, rules and multilateral
cooperation – is being replaced by an increasingly nationalist and inward-looking approach by states
(Luo and Van Assche, 2023; see also Schwaag Serger and Shih, 2024).
Consequently, more protectionist policies that have emerged in several countries around the globe
(linking to OSA and TS as described in Section 3.3), may continue to have large implications on the
openness of science and innovation. For instance, the US CHIPS and Science Act, approved in 2022
“prohibits American nationals (citizens and permanent residents) from supporting the development
and production of advanced chips in Chinese firms” (Luo and Van Assche, 2023). In essence, this shift
means that managing and sustaining global innovation networks, as we have known to date, becomes
much more challenging (Luo and Van Assche, 2023). Such “geopolitisation of science and innovation”
does not only concern globally powerful states. Schwaag Serger and Shih (2024, p.14) note that “[g]eo-
political competition is forcing researchers, institutions and countries to re -examine and reconsider
the premises, purposes and potential pitfalls of cross-border scientific collaboration”.
Signs of securitisation of science are visible in an increasing number of countries, including the group
of G7 countries and the EU . In the EU, the term “research security” has appeared alongside strategic
autonomy. Research security implies that there is a need to protect research from foreign actors and

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 11
interests, linking to the pursuit of technological leadership in many areas (Schwaag Serger and Shih,
2024; see also Draghi, 2024). In certain dual-use contexts, such stipulations existed already two decades
ago (McLeish and Nightingale, 2007), although the EU avoided incorporating dual-use in its STI pro-
grammes.4
The geopolitisation of science and innovation is linked to cross-sectoral processes towards strategic
autonomy and technology sovereignty. These concepts can be seen to exist in the interface of com-
petitiveness and security pursuits in the EU, and possibly elsewhere too. The next section explains these
concepts and their connection to security in more detail.
3.3 Emerging debate on open strategic autonomy and technology
sovereignty
In the OECD world, the need to develop and master innovation-driving technologies (e.g. nanotech-
nology, biotechnology, AI; also described as key enabling technologies) has been a major feature in
innovation and technology policy since the 2010s (Foray, 2019). The main concern for states and the
EU has been to ensure that national economies are able to compete with other nations for the leader-
ship in producing those technologies, and, more recently, increase industrial innovation to address so-
cietal challenges and creating advanced sustainable economies (European Commission, 2018).5
However, since around 2020, the meaning of key (enabling) technologies has shifted, and with it the
rationale for supporting them. Triggered through the increasing competition between China, Europe
and recently the US and the experiences in Europe during COVID-19, policymakers at national and EU
levels recognised the need to identify those technologies that are indispensable, not only for compet-
itiveness, but also for the functioning of the economy and the provision of public goods through the
state itself. This is referred to as technology sovereignty, which has been defined as "the ability of a
state or a federation of states to provide the technologies it deems critical for its welfare, competitive-
ness, and ability to act, and to be able to develop these or source them from other economic areas
without one-sided structural dependency" (Edler et al., 2020).6
A related term is that of open strategic autonomy that has originated in EU defence and foreign policy
(Damen, 2022) and has expanded to energy and industrial policy domains (Schmitz and Seidl, 2023;
Kivimaa and Entsalo, 2026). OSA aims to reduce the EU’s dependencies from third countries in critical
sectors (Miró, 2023) and to pursue openness while being resilient and assertive (Schmitz and Seidl,
2023). Openness in this regard has been argued to create internal policy contradictions (Huang and
Soete, 2025), while the EU’s research and innovation system has remained ‘notably open’ (Cerra et al.,
2025). Although the concept is vague and broad, it pushes policymaking towards similar trajectories
as technology sovereignty. Similar policies are also instigated by major states, such as the US and China
aiming to bolster industrial policy and safeguard domestic capabilities.

4 “Dual-use military applications of civilian technologies remained explicitly outside of the European scope of action; they were eli minated from any of
the framework research support programmes of the EC when they were first developed in the 1980s and subse quently renewed and enlarged to the
current Horizon Europe R&D support programme.” (Kattel and Soete, 2024, p. 19)
5 Accessed 25.4.2025: https://knowledge4policy.ec.europa.eu/foresight/topic/accelerating -technological-change-hyperconnectivity/key-enabling-
technologies-kets_en
6 The major elements of this definition are shared widely in the literature and in policy documents, see e.g. Di Girolamo et al ., 2023; Kroll et al., 2024;
Da Ponte et al., 2023; March and Schieferdecker, 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 12
There are two main consequences for this paper’s debate. First, there is a need to provide the ability
to use and, if needed, to produce, the technologies required for three major purposes: economic wel-
fare, politically defined directions (e.g., energy transition, mobility transition, digitalisation of admin-
istrations) and critical public goods (e.g., security in a broad sense, defence, health provision). Second,
just when the provision and use of key enabling technologies is recognised as being of broader and
more basic importance, the very provision and use of them is less secured, because trust in the global
division of labour and global cooperation in R&D and innovation diminished considerably.
The concept of technology sovereignty is now firmly embedded in debates around national industrial
or innovation policies (Edler, 2024; Lee et al., 2024). It has been argued that this push for sovereignty
in innovation policy is largely based on the military notion of security (Huang and Soete, 2025) as
opposed to other notions, such as positive security (see, e.g., Hoogensen Gjørv and Bilgic, 2022). Tech-
nological sovereignty means, primarily, that strategic decisions are to be taken as to what kinds of
technologies are critical against the three purposes mentioned above. This is important for our discus-
sion, because the concept as now developed and implemented, does not per se favour security con-
cerns over other concerns (e.g. competitiveness). Rather, it recognises the importance of sovereignty
for the ability to act more broadly. Furthermore, both academic contributions and policy applications
recognise that sovereignty is not to be confused with autarky (Edler et al., 2023; March and
Schieferdecker, 2023). Contrarily, sovereignty, or OSA, implies to mobilise synergies and cooperation
with trusted partners. It is a means to increase international technology cooperation in a more re-
stricted international space, while it cuts ties in critical areas with less trusted partners. Hence, it risks
contributing to further decline in understanding and trust between, and increasing integration within,
blocs. Thus, the concept, while being applied to economic, security and broader transformational ra-
tionales domestically, may increase the sense of resilience domestically and within international spaces
of sufficient trust, while increasing tensions globally, beyond and between those areas of trust. In ex-
tension, technology sovereignty may be a catalyst for synergies between like-minded countries (if such
still exist) and within integrated economic spaces such as the EU. The increased division of labour
between the like-minded may increase the overall effectiveness of innovation policy, while it reduces
those synergies on a global scale. Therefore, synergies and tensions between different innovation pol-
icy objectives (e.g. sustainability and security), which is at the heart of this article, may play out differ-
ently within the area of trusted partnerships versus relationships between different areas of trust.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 13
4 Synergies and tensions brought by security as a new objective
for challenge-led innovation policy
This section explores synergies and tensions between security becoming a new objective for and the
sustainability-orientation of challenge-led innovation policy. Although economic goals, competitive-
ness and growth, have characterised STI policies since their post-World War origin (Lindner et al., 2024),
our analysis focuses on how security influences the third frame of innovation policy. The section is
organised based on the five imperatives that are of particular importance for TIP and MIP as identified
and described in Section 2. The ways in which the increased focus on security will interact with those
imperatives will shape the relationship with TIP/MIP.
4.1 Directionality
Directionality “indicates that innovation processes can take different directions, with more or less fa-
vorable consequences” (Pel, 2024, p. 2). The imperative of providing direction, to enable synergies in
transformation processes, implies a process of exploring and pursuing desirable and feasible directions
for innovation processes (Weber and Rohracher, 2012). Visions, missions and targets can be seen as
some of the ways to guide directionality (Geels et al., 2019) . Directionality is described as a political
process that poses questions, such as who gives direction, which direction is given, where and how is
direction given, when and why does a direction change (or not) (de Graaff et al., 2025) . Introducing
security and geopolitics as an objective for innovation policy means that new security-oriented actors
emerge to give direction, influence what directions are taken, and potential changes in directions. For
example, dual-use technologies have recently strongly re-emerged as an area of increasing interest
for innovation policy, following a risen security rhetoric (Blais-Savoie, 2025; Caviggioli et al., 2023; Grin-
baum and Adomaitis, 2024).
There can be obvious synergies when the environmental or social challenges addressed by challenge-
led innovation policy also bring security benefits. Examples include innovating in, for instance, energy
efficiency, resource efficiency, demand response or e nergy storage technologies which reduce the
need for imported fossil fuels (EASAC, 2025). These kinds of innovations can reduce concerns for se-
curity of supply and geopolitical power of fossil fuel producers (Scholten et al., 2020; Vakulchuk et al.,
2020).
However, as technological development is fast, also pertaining to sustainability-oriented innovations,
the governance of transitions is challenged by possible security threats and vulnerabilities created by
technologies which are essential for those transitions but for which technology sovereignty is hard to
realise (March and Schieferdecker, 2023). An example is when the ‘smart parts’ of zero -carbon tech-
nologies, such as of solar panels or electric vehicles, are produced non-domestically and could poten-
tially be controlled by a third-party state or a private actor with malicious intentions. Other risks include
the creation of new dependencies on concentrated supply chains. For example, the EU has strategic
dependencies on China in mid- and downstream parts of solar PV production (Caravella et al., 2024).
It has been argued that pursuits towards increased security and strategic autonomy as part of innova-
tion and industrial policies should focus on critical sectors, materials and components. There are also
broader cyber-security risks associated with increasingly digitalised innovations (Cavelty and Egloff,
2019; EASAC, 2025).

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 14
Finding synergies and alignment between security and sustainability is a crucial part of providing di-
rection but such pursuit also comes with some risks. As particular visions around innovation may reject
other directions of change (Stirling, 2009), vision building seeking synergies between sustainability
challenges and security, may overrule innovation trajectories that are not applicable for such synergies.
This could, for instance, mean that innovation processes aiming for dual-use technologies7 will be
funded more easily or with proportionally greater budgets than single use solutions. Yet, dual-use has
been noted to complicate the design of innovation policy that simultaneously needs to address diffu-
sion of socially beneficial technologies, often managed by non -state actors who are external to the
remit of national security policy (McLeish and Nightingale, 2007). Moreover, innovation processes en-
tail substantial uncertainty about future outcomes, and hence, overruling certain innovation paths
based on second guessing can be harmful from the perspective of sustainability transitions. Missions
often aim for a more concrete direction than broader sustainability visions, but they do so at the ex-
pense of openness and diversity associated with innovation in transitions (Bulah et al., 2024).
The temporal dimension of directionality is important too from the perspective of synergies and ten-
sions. If too a short-term perspective is adopted in innovation policy, immediate security and defence
needs may override more gradually developing global ch allenges around nature loss, health or pov-
erty. The proposal to redirect EU cohesion policy funding for defence and dual -use already shows
some movement in this regard.8 Cohesion policy has been argued to be under pressure from shifting
EU priorities, where obscuring regional priorities with current geopolitical agendas may risk the previ-
ous beneficial features of cohesion policy, i.e., responsiveness to local conditions a nd inclusion, and
lead to increasing economic polarisation (Rodríguez-Pose, 2025). Contrarily, orientation into long-term
security and peace-building processes (Huda, 2024) can find synergies with long-term sustainability
transitions.
Synergies and tensions between sustainability and security also depend on what kind of terminology
is used, and how key concepts are defined. Section 3 introduced the concepts of negative and positive
security that imply differences in terms of key actors (states and militaries vs. citizens and communities)
and orientations (protection against threats vs. increasing feelings of wellbeing and being empow-
ered). Other concepts linking to security, such as open strategic autonomy and technology sovereignty
also have different interpretations. In effect, Lee et al. (2024) argue that technology sovereignty can be
interpreted via more protectionist techno -nationalism or more open collaborative sovereignty. They
argue that the former actually fails to promote sovereignty, because, first, technologies are not owned
by specific countries but developed in global innovation networks, second, the development pace of
advanced technologies is so fast that global knowledge networks are needed to keep up, and, third ,
national innovation systems tend to be path-dependent and hence exclude certain capabilities (Lee et
al., 2024). From the perspective of directionality, a path -dependent and techno-nationalist approach
is more likely to miss important directions that, in the future, can provide synergies between sustain-
ability and security.

7 Dual-use can be understood in terms of technological convergence, where different downstream technologies (some military, others peaceful) share
some of their upstream technological inputs, where dangerous military applications may be overestimated by policymakers (McLeish and Nightin-
gale, 2007).
8 Accessed 25.02.2026: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_25_930

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 15
4.2 Experimentation and deep learning
Experimentation has a substantial role in challenge-led innovation policy, as means of policy (i.e. ex-
perimental culture, policy experimentation) and as interim outputs (e.g. different types of technical,
social and market experiments) (Kivimaa and Rogge, 2022; Mazzucato, 2018b; Sengers et al., 2020). A
key feature of experimentation is the kind of learning it generates, in particular deep learning and
unlearning established practices (Brown et al., 2003; van Oers et al., 2023) and the spread of such
learning across innovation actors and the society. An example is the interface between electric vehicles
and the energy system, where experimentation is needed to configure how the charging infrastructure
can help rapidly respond to disruptions in electricity production and what kind of institutional or prac-
tice-based conditions this requires.
Integrating security into challenge-led innovation policy places perhaps even more emphasis on the
need for different types of experimentation, to find the ways in which the dual objectives of innovation
policy can be pursued and achieved. Types of learning in sustainability transitions can be described in
terms of technical, market, policy and cultural learning. Integrating security into challenge-led innova-
tion implies, for example, technical learning about the opportunities of dual-use technologies, market
learning about how security will shape sustainability innovation markets, policy learning in terms of
what kind of policies can best address combined challenges, and cultural learning about the changing
context we are living in. The present geopolitical-security shift may be a very influential driver, because
wars have been noted to substantially alter the cultural and symbolic landscape (see Johnstone and
McLeish, 2022). Such shifts were also observed following the invasion of Russia into Ukraine in 202 2
(Kivimaa and Sivonen, 2024).
A potential tension is related to diffusion of knowledge and learning, as security aspects tend to bring
in more confidentiality in innovation processes. For instance, there is empirical evidence in how biose-
curity9 concerns have reduced scientists’ freedom to publish results (McLeish and Nightingale, 2007).
Although in the STI efforts following World War II, defence actors drove the use of their research in
peacetime applications (Schot and Steinmueller, 2018a) , subsequently the defence industry has be-
come a “closed knowledge system” aiming to prevent information exchange, raising questions on how
to integrate such a system into policies designed for openness (Kattel and Soete, 2024). Tensions may
also result from psychological barriers for collaboration between two distinct communities, or from
the redirection of resources from transition experimentation to defence.
4.3 Inclusivity and diversity
Challenge-led innovation policy emphasises the inclusion of more marginal actors in innovation (pol-
icy) processes and inclusive growth , thereby, widening the traditional scope of actors in innovation
policy (Akon-Yamga et al., 2021; Grillitsch et al., 2020; Mazzucato, 2016) . Both TIP and MIP also em-
phasise the importance of bottom-up processes (Mazzucato, 2018b; Schot and Steinmueller, 2018a).
This may be in contradiction to an orientation into negative (i.e. hard) security approach, where sensi-
tive information can require exclusion on a need-to-know basis. In the context of dual-use biological
technologies, non-state actors have been viewed both as sources of threat and of technological capa-
bilities (McLeish and Nightingale, 2007) . A shift of power to private actors has also been argued to
pose a more general security risk related to technology sovereignty (March and Schieferdecker, 2023).

9 Biosecurity refers to the prevention of the spread of harmful organisms, such as pathogens, pests, and invasive species that can harm human, animal
or plant health or the environment.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 16
Yet, private sector actors have often been found to be more innovative than the more stagnant and
path dependent public sector. However, if more generally (although not necessarily in the context of
dual-use) focus can be directed also to positive security in innovation policy, synergies can be found
between challenge-led and security approaches via empowerment of communities and citizens in in-
novation (policy) efforts leading to improved feelings of safety. Instead, if innovation policy is only
linked to hard security, democratic processes may face risks due to increased securitisation of innova-
tion policymaking.
Vision setting processes, which should be at the core of challenge led policies, have been argued to
be influenced by power and agency, where incumbent and powerful positions tend to dominate, over-
riding diverse representation (Bulah et al., 2024; Weber and Rohracher, 2012) . Attention to security,
and especially to negative security, may re-strengthen incumbent power positions based on defence
and hard security in innovation policy (see Johnstone and Newell, 2018).10 Here an important determi-
nant is the degree of incumbency and their orientation into transition versus change (Apajalahti et al.,
2018; Stirling, 2019; Turnheim and Sovacool, 2020).
Bulah et al. (2024) argue that diversity associated with transitions needs to also include the heteroge-
neous nature of places, such as regions or cities, because working solutions are influenced by their
geographical fit, culture and regional capabilities. This means that th ere is variation in how and what
kind of synergies can be found between security and sustainability challenges across regions. One clear
example is that states and regions traditionally dependent on imported fossil fuels, can find synergies
between innovations that aim to reduce CO2 emissions and reduce such dependencies (Kivimaa and
Sivonen, 2023). The same logic applies to products and processes using critical raw materials and es-
pecially rare earths, that has already resulted in cross -domain strategies addressing both circular in-
novation and strategic dependencies (e.g. the EU’s Critical Raw Materials Act and the Clean Industrial
Deal).
4.4 Regime destabilisation and phase-out
Previous empirical research has pointed out that often traditional security concerns have slowed down
sustainability transitions in the energy sector (Johnstone et al., 2017; Kivimaa, 2024). Some of the key
issues here have been tightly interconnected structures of militaries and energy, in terms of using fossil
fuels in army operations dating back to World Wars I and II, as well as STI activities across civic and
military nuclear power development. The larger states’ militaries also play a role in safeguarding fossil
fuel trade routes. Hence, this incumbent historical interconnection between militaries and fossil energy
has created a tension between security and sustainability.
However, the globally turbulent situation, alongside climate change already affecting military opera-
tions, have created rapid needs for technological advancement in the military sector. For example, in
India, the military is increasingly addressing climate security risks in its strategies and operations
(Jayaram, 2024). NATO has noted the impacts of climate change on its military bases and operations,
affected via permafrost thaw, flooding, storms and forest fires (NATO, 2024). Innovation is needed for
military near-zero and zero-carbon solutions to decouple military infrastructure and equipment from
carbon-intensive fuel sources, which can be facilitated by NATO’s Environmental Protection Working

10 Defence companies function as policy advisers, while simultaneously benefit from decisions made; e.g. the European Defence Fund has been argued
to be ‘captured’ by the defence industry lobby (Martins and Mawdsley, 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 17
Group that delivers expertise to alliance-wide innovation, ongoing innovation on alternative fuels, and
sharing of procurements standards (Farham et al., 2023).
Some synergies and tensions are sector - or region-specific, as noted above. Efforts towards regime
decline goals in challenge -led innovation policy create security benefits, when import of materials,
components or supplies are presently delivered from concentrated supplier countries. This is often
coupled with replacement technologies that may create new dependencies, for which assessments are
needed as part of the innovation policy mix (see sub-section 4.5).
From the perspective of positive security, socio-technical regime destabilisation also creates tensions.
As feelings of ‘freedom from insecurity’ (Booth, 2007) are based on rather stable conditions, sustaina-
bility transitions may create uncertainty and resistance especially in those regions where incumbent
industries have been large employers (see Lempinen, 2019; MacNeil and Beauman, 2022).
4.5 Comprehensive and adaptive policy mix
Providing a balanced and adaptive i nnovation policy mix has become of central importance in chal-
lenge-led policymaking (Haddad et al., 2022; Rogge and Reichardt, 2016). A policy mix, in this context,
refers to the combination of policy goals, instruments and processes that influence the advancement
of socio-technical transitions towards sustainability (Rogge and Reichardt, 2016). While perspectives
considering more comprehensive and real-word attuned policy mixes have been argued for (Flanagan
et al., 2011), considering security as part of the innovation policy mix may be challenging if the policy
mix is considered too broadly in horizontal terms.
A challenge-led innovation policy mix, attuned to security, would consider besides the promotion of
dual-use technologies, the reduction of environmental impacts of security -oriented innovations and
the reduction of security risks from sustainability-oriented innovations. This would be akin to ‘environ-
mental policy integration’ into security innovation and ‘s ecurity policy integration’ into sustainability
innovation (see Cejudo and Michel, 2017; Lafferty and Hovden, 2003) improving policy coherence be-
tween the objectives of sustainability and security.
The negative environmental effects of military and defence activities are well noted, while militaries
have also become actors in responding to climate change effects (Depledge, 2023; Jayaram, 2023), see
previous section. Innovation policy mixes could seek to promote innovations that minimise the envi-
ronmental impacts of military technology development. Some proposed examples include environ-
mental requirements for steel and other components used for security and defence technology devel-
opment and developing near-zero alternative fuels for the military (Farham et al., 2023).
Both TIP and MIP approaches indicate that policy mixes driving systemic change require balancing
supply and demand side measures (Haddad et al., 2022). A typical example of the latter involves stra-
tegic use of public procurement, for instance, for policy goals related to competitiveness and sustain-
ability (Kundu et al., 2025). Rising security concerns could lead to restrictions in terms of who to procure
from, or what to procure. This could imply limited access to innovative or sustainable solutions from
suppliers located in risky countries, corresponding to Lee’s (2024) warnings regarding the perils of
techno-nationalism. Alternatively, more stringent procurement criteria could also improve the playing
field for nearby suppliers providing sustainable and/or innovative solutions (Meershoek, 2023). A re-
cent survey of EU-wide public procurement suggests that conducting national security assessments in
public procurement does not harm or benefit competition or sustainability and stimulates innovation
at the national level (ref to be added after publication).

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 18
5 Discussion
This section provides a summary of insights on the above exploratory analysis of synergies and ten-
sions caused by security as a new objective for challenge -led innovation policy, discussing the impli-
cations for policymaking. This leads to a proposition of three broad policy approaches to tackle this
issue, followed by outlining future research needs.
Table 2 offers a summary of the dimensions along which challenge-led innovation policy imperatives
and heightened security concerns may exhibit synergies or generate tensions.
Table 2: Summary of synergies and tensions between challenge-led innovation policy
and security.
Challenge-led in-
novation policy
imperative
Synergies with security as a new pol-
icy objective
Tensions with security as a new policy objective
Directionality

• Innovating in resource/energy effi-
ciency or other solutions that re-
duce dependence on foreign sup-
pliers.
• Identification of critical sectors and
technologies, in terms of security
and competitiveness, that also have
sustainability benefits.
• Development of dual-use solutions
with applications in both sustaina-
bility and security domains.
• Long-term directional processes to
address global environmental/social
change and peace-building.
• Orientation to security and defence
that is framed in terms of openness,
collaboration and wellbeing/justice
is more likely to reap synergies via
challenge-led innovation policy.
• Security risks and vulnerabilities of increasingly
smart technologies used in sustainability-ori-
ented innovations.
• Overruling innovation trajectories that are not
simultaneously applicable to both sustainabil-
ity and security goals (possibly based on lim-
ited information).
• Dual-use complicating the design of innova-
tion policy, e.g. in case of conflicts to involve
both state and non-state actors in security-
sensitive processes.
• Short-term urgency and orientation to security
and defence may override the severity and ur-
gency of addressing sustainability challenges.
• Techno-nationalist and path-dependent inter-
pretations of security likely to miss out on fu-
ture synergies, water down the commitment to
international commitments (Paris) and suffer
from lack of capabilities.
Experimentation and
deep learning
• An experimental policymaking ap-
proach, typical to challenge-led in-
novation policy, is likely to support
the synergy finding process to ad-
dress security, competitiveness and
sustainability together.

• Spread of experimental learning limited by
confidentiality issues and publication bans re-
lated to security (and competitiveness).
• The general psychological barriers to experi-
mentation are heightened through the need
to bring together hitherto distinct communi-
ties for joint experimentation

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 19
Challenge-led in-
novation policy
imperative
Synergies with security as a new pol-
icy objective
Tensions with security as a new policy objective
Inclusivity • Orientation into positive security,
i.e. empowerment of citizens and
communities, can also be beneficial
to tackling sustainability challenge
via innovation policy.
• Synergies between sustainability
and security are placed-based,
where in best cases the security of
supply and security of infrastructure
risks are reduced via the advancing
transitions.
• Tension between broadening the scope of in-
novation actors in challenge-led policy versus
more closed processes oriented to (hard) se-
curity and confidential information.
• Shift of power to private, non-state actors,
considered as a security risk.
• Security-orientation may restrengthen incum-
bent power positions, potentially countering
sustainability efforts and limiting learning.
• Risk to democratic decision-making processes
via securitisation of innovation policy, and thus
delegitimization of potential solutions and al-
ienation of parts of science community.
Regime destabilisa-
tion and phase-out
• Synergies between near-zero mili-
tary innovation and preventing
worsening impacts on climate
change on military operations.
• Creating synergies by means of just
transitions and empowerment that
offer new opportunities for citizens
and regions.
• Path-dependent interconnections between
military and fossil fuel sectors have hindered
sustainability transitions.
• Regime destabilisation creating uncertainty
and resistance in some communities and re-
gions.
Comprehensive and
adaptive policy mix
• Possibilities for alignment via policy
mixes supporting dual-use technol-
ogies, and an approach for advanc-
ing policy integration and coher-
ence.
• More public procurement from
strategic partners implies a better
playing field for sustainable and/or
innovative solutions from EU/do-
mestic suppliers
• Negative sustainability impacts of increasing
promotion of defence and security technolo-
gies.
• Governance coordination failure between ad-
ministrative units with different rationales and
practices.

Source: Based on own research.
Regarding synergies and tensions, our analysis highlights the complicatedness of combining the latest
two objectives of innovation policy, i.e. sustainability and security, as each objective brings its own
rationales, strategies, knowledge dynamics and actor-networks. This has implications for how to safe-
guard the imperatives of challenge-led innovation policy, while ideally also contributing to enhanced
security. For instance, tensions around the directionality imperative suggests that ways in which secu-
rity is defined and seen as part of innovation policy needs to be broad and open (enabling capability
development and combination), rather than narrow and exclusionary. Experimentation and deep learn-
ing need to be encouraged by setting up living labs and regulatory sandboxes that enable exploring
how to reap synergies between sustainability and security in innovation (policy) processes. Regarding
the inclusivity and diversity imperative, innovation policy processes should account for the role of in-
cumbency in exploring and pursuing innovation directions. Pertaining to regime destabilisation and
phaseout, to create more synergies between positive security and sustainability transitions, challenge-
led innovation policy needs to create opportunities via new employment prospects and by empower-
ing citizens and communities. The imperative of a comprehensive and adaptive policy mix emphasises

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 20
the needs for improved policy integration between security and sustainability objectives (for instance,
in technology assessment and public procurement).
The above are required generic policy responses to the dilemma presented in this paper. Their empir-
ical manifestation is likely to differ across sectors, regions and time. That is, besides uncertainties as-
sociated with innovation itself, there are also uncertainties stemming from ongoing real-world devel-
opments around security, geopolitics and sustainability transitions (including the actions major states
take). These uncertainties are in turn subject to different interpretations by actors, depending on their
cultural, political and economic settings (Kivimaa and Sivonen, 2024; Laatsit et al., 2025). New expec-
tations can be created via technological progress, but large cultural imprints change slowly and are
shaped by wars and other security crises (McLeish et al., 2022).
Acknowledging the variabilities in how security synergies and tensions manifest themselves, or are
perceived and framed, reflexive policymaking should be at the heart of challenge-led innovation policy.
So far, however, reflexivity has been found to be poorly addressed by the current innovation policy
toolbox (Laatsit et al., 2025). The EU policy community has proposed approaches that somehow couple
competitiveness and security (i.e. open strategic autonomy and technology sovereignty). Meanwhile,
the academic community has derived concepts of TIP and MIP with some applications in the EU (e.g.
in the five EU missions), which occasionally address competitiveness alongside sustainability (e.g. the
EU Green Deal). The interface of sustainability and security, ho wever, has been largely ignored, while
new thinking on energy security finds synergies between the two objectives (see EASAC, 2025). Like-
wise, specific policy concepts and approaches are still lacking at the intersection of all three objectives,
although the new European Commission policies, such as the Competitiveness Compass and the Clean
Industrial Deal in some ways mention the three objectives of competitiveness, sustainability (in terms
of decarbonisation mostly), and security (primarily in terms of economic resilience). More comprehen-
sive approaches are needed to address this intersection.
5.1 Three broad policy strategies
Our discussion of possible synergies and tensions pointed at various ways to reconcile security and
sustainability objectives in innovation policy. To offer a conceptual basis for comprehensive policy
approaches, addressing multiple possible innovation pol icy objectives at once, we abstract from the
more detailed findings and distinguish
three broad policy strategies: 1) aligning objectives and seeking synergies; 2) minimising counter -ef-
fects of security-oriented policies on sustainability transitions; and 3) minimising new security risks and
vulnerabilities of challenge-led innovation policies.
The preferred strategy, alignment, means supporting innovation paths and technologies that create
either double (sustainability and security) or even triple potential (sustainability, security, and compet-
itiveness). Examples here include energy efficiency; resource efficiency and circular economy-oriented
innovations; electrification of military vehicles in certain conditions; and dual-use technologies. Policies
should encourage for governing actors and others to identify the existence of such win-win(-win) sce-
narios, and what it would take to realise them in practice. However, as the various objectives are often
not fully or even partially compatible (as indicated by many intrinsic tensions), the other two strategies
are important too.
When innovation paths pursued for security cannot simultaneously serve sustainability, it is essential
to at least minimise the counter-effects on sustainability. Here, an example is to guide security-related

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 21
innovations to better consider material needs and environmental risks. Pertaining to strategic auton-
omy, for instance, advancing ‘cleantech’ to pursue new industries must not only think about their
greenhouse gas emissions, but the effects of mining and in dustrial facilities on biodiversity, water
quality or air emissions – which not only fail to address sustainability but may also exacerbate environ-
mental security risks. It is also important to be aware of the nature of ‘securitisation’ (see Section 3.2)
taking place and avoid cases where the wider public is kept uninformed of the potentially detrimental
environmental and social effects of innovations justified on security grounds. Policymaking should also
become desecuritised when a potential emergency phase is over.
In line with the logic of the second strategy, the pursuit of challenge-led policies must attempt to be
aware and minimise adverse effects on security. This is not an easy endeavour, as so far, for instance,
the advancement of sustainability transitions has shifted the EU’s fossil fuel import dependencies to
increased dependencies on critical raw materials (largely controlled by China), affecting security of
supply and strategic autonomy. Hence, future innovation policies and activities must try to better an-
ticipate them before the possible dependencies and independencies that sustainability innovations
create in terms of resource, trade and value chains, data-related risks or critical infrastructure.
For seeking synergies and minimising counter -effects, policymakers can and should consider a wide
range of policy and governance measures. Following distinctions used in innovation policy (Flanagan
et al., 2011) and environmental governance literatures (Oberthür, 2019), this could include hard policy
measures (financial incentives or coercive tools) and soft (non-coercive) policy measures. For instance,
one might seek synergies by implementing innovation support instruments or procurement guidelines
targeted at leadership in security-sensitive critical technologies or materials, or merely by creating new
governance structures that formulate and coordinate mission-like ambitions on security and sustain-
ability. Counter-effects can be minimised by, for example, strictly obliging sustainable innovation sub-
sidies to prioritise sovereignty, or through softer discouragement of reliance on actors or components
from risky countries.
Given the potential misalignment among innovation policy objectives, and the fact that synergies or
tensions between them are often indirect and therefore not immediately apparent, it is reasonable to
expect that policymakers may not rely solely on measures with an explicit security orientation. Instead,
they may adopt more implicit strategies that promote security objectives de facto rather than de jure.
Regarding the example of setting policy targets that aim to have a positive security and sustainability
impact, this could take the shape of articulating missions centred on themes like ‘green AI’ (Schwartz
et al., 2020) . While not overtly related to security, such initiatives may nevertheless contribute to
broader goals such as digital sovereignty. Similarly, directing public investment toward the civil devel-
opment of dual -use technologies may provide an indirect route f or pursuing security -related aims.
Ultimately, the extent to which policymakers choose either explicit or implicit approaches —and the
implications of these choices for policy effectiveness—remains to be seen.
Our key suggestion for policymakers is that they should seek synergies between different innovation
policy objectives (competitiveness, sustainability, security), but recognise what directions may be
closed in the process – and carefully evaluate the cascading impacts of such closed directions. More-
over, we advise to include defence, foreign policy and other security actors in innovation (policy) pro-
cesses. Preferably such processes remain as inclusive as possible, while ensuring that taking on board
different actors does not limit other actors – except in exceptional circumstances (e.g. particular dual-
use technologies).

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 22
5.2 Avenues for further research
Our paper is intended as a new opening for the research communities around (challenge-led) innova-
tion policy, international relations and security. It illustrates how the real -world policy context is be-
coming increasingly challenging, with unknown implications for how the innovation policy field will
continue evolving. Figure 1 sketches possible directions, ranging from a scenario in which security
considerations enhance the integration of sustainability goals (based on the identified synergies), to a
scenario in which the pendulum swings back to competitiveness-focused innovation policy. There are
also in-between scenarios in which security is positioned alongside sustainability challenges (e.g. as
another societal challenge), or where all goals are considered simultaneously. To what extent such all-
encompassing innovation policy is feasible is yet to be determined, as genuinely addressing sustaina-
bility challenges might involve difficult trade-offs for all the situations in which a win-win-win scenario
remains out of scope. We thus call for empirical research examining how the triple objectives presented
(competitiveness, sustainability, security) have been or could be addressed in different regional, na-
tional and sectoral contexts and in EU innovation policymaking. What kind of tensions are caused by
security as a new objective for innovation policy? What practical tools or policy instruments are avail-
able or could be used to find synergies and minimise contradictions in practice? What kind of needs
does security present for the further evolution of TIP and MIP research? Future re search should also
explore synergies/tensions associated with potential further horizontal ‘objectives’ for innovation pol-
icy. These include, for example, the increasing digitalisation-data-AI development, or the calls for im-
proving justice and fairness of policies.
Figure 1: Four possible scenarios for further evolution of the innovation policy field

Source: Own illustration.
The overall contribution of our study consists of raising awareness and providing nuance regarding
the many different ways rising security concerns influence challenge -led innovation policy. These in-
fluences can have the form of synergies or tensions, even for individual properties of challenge -led
innovation policy. That having said, it remains important to acknowledge that challenge-led innovation
policy as such might become sidelined now that attention and budgets are shifting so rapidly. Or,
stated differently, now that security is becoming the challenge perceived as more pressing than any
other societal challenge. For the increasingly overshadowed innovation policies concerned with for
instance sustainability per se, there is a risk that a losing moment um undermines their continuation
1. Security-sustainability synergies could
reinforce challenge-led innovation policy
2. Security might bend the challenge-led
debate, away from sustainability challenges
3. Security (and sustainability) issues become
an integral part of innovation policy
4. Security concerns mark a return to
competitiveness-oriented innovation policy
Competitiveness Sustainability
Security
Frame 1&2 Frame 3
1
2
3
4

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 23
and fruition. We recommend future research to follow these developments closely and explore possi-
bilities to sustain the much -needed long-term perspective and stability transformative and mission -
oriented innovation policies demand.

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 24
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we argued that increasing security concerns influence also innovation policy . From this
basis, we analysed potential synergies and tensions that the introduction of security as a policy objec-
tive creates for challenge -led innovation policy – focusing on one of the main current societal chal-
lenges, i.e. the transformation towards sustainability.
We combined literatures on transformative innovation policy (TIP) and mission -oriented innovation
policy (MIP) to derive five imperatives required for successful challenge-led innovation policymaking.
We conclude that there are several important potential synergies, supporting a positive connection
between security and innovation -policy-driven sustainability. However, rising security concerns are
also likely and put pressure on the imperatives and thus the promise of challenge-led innovation pol-
icy. The identified tensions within those imperatives need to be understood and addressed to better
align the two policy objectives with each other, and with the traditional objective of innovation policy
– economic competitiveness.
The key output of this paper was to generate attention as to the range of synergies and tensions that
security as a policy objective brings for challenge-led innovation policy. This initial conceptual analysis
is intended to guide further (empirically oriented) assessments on synergies and tensions, their prev-
alence and importance in different sectoral, national and regional innovation policy contexts. Such
analyses would also help in emphasising the reflexivity of innovation policymaking, where new and
revised assessments are needed with changing geopolitical developments and technological progress.
We also showed that defining security broadly – both as military and non -military security and as
negative and positive security – is useful in the identification and elaboration of synergies and tensions.
On this basis, we argue that the ways in which security is defined and seen as part of innovation policy
needs to be broad and open, rather than closed and narrow. Such an open approach also recognises
that security is very much a place -based phenomena, influenced by pre -existing technologies, re-
sources, institutions, cultural settings and capabilities in different regions and states. Yet, simultane-
ously, we can see changes in the global context and the World order that affect innovation practices
across borders. Therefore, there are probably also common synergies and tensions for different inno-
vation policy settings.
Finally, mobilising the literatures on TIP and MIP can be useful in a practical sense when it comes to
developing innovation policy and security policy agendas. First, the developed framework and the
identified imperatives might give guidance as to how to advance security as a new innovation policy
objective. While originally proposed in the context of challenge-led innovation policy, imperatives re-
garding directionality and inclusivity can also serve security goals. Second, empirical experiences on
advancing “security as a challenge” within innovation policy can also help us derive general lessons on
how challenge-led policies can be advanced in different and more politically amenable contexts. Fur-
ther, the framework might give us signals as to how to merge different kinds of communities around
innovation – albeit this will produce tensions itself as well. In any case, increased alignment is needed
due to the inevitable links between security and sustainability: Without secure and resilient societies,
it will be difficult to advance sustainability transitions. And without sustainability transitions, there will
be far worse insecurities and security crises in the future.

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 25
Acknowledgements
Paula Kivimaa and Matthijs Janssen contributions to this paper were made as part of the Challenge-
led Innovation Policy and Geopolitical Uncertainty (CIPGeS)-project, funded by Business Finland (deci-
sion number 2335/31/2024). We thank Marja Sivonen for comments on an earlier version of the man-
uscript. This working paper has also been submitted to a review in an academic journal, to be published
there in a future revised format.

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 26
References
Akon-Yamga, G., Daniels, C.U., Quaye, W., Ting, B.M., Asante, A.A. (2021): Transformative innovation
policy approach to e-waste management in Ghana: Perspectives of actors on transformative
changes. Science and Public Policy 48, 387–397. https://doi.org/10.1093/SCIPOL/SCAB005
Apajalahti, E.-L., Temmes, A., Lempiälä, T. (2018): Incumbent organisations shaping emerging
technological fields: cases of solar photovoltaic and electric vehicle charging. Technology
Analysis & Strategic Management 30, 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537325.2017.1285397
Barbieri Góes, M.C., Viesti, G. (2025): The Revival of Industrial Policies in the EU? Review of Political
Economy 37, 344–368. https://doi.org/10.1080/09538259.2024.2368210
Bauer, M., Erixon, F. (2020): Europe’s quest for technology sovereignty: Opportunities and pitfalls,
EPICE Occational Paper. European Centre for International Political Economy (ECIPE), Brussels,
Belgium.
Berling, T.V., Gad, U.P., Petersen, K.L., Wæver, O. (2021): Translations of security: A framework for the
study of unwanted futures, Translations of Security: A Framework for the Study of Unwanted
Futures. Taylor and Francis. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003175247
Blais-Savoie, F. (2025): A Dual-Use Solution to a Dual Problem: Canada’s Innovation and Defence
Spending, Policy Report. Network for Strategic Analysis, Canada.
Blondeel, M., Bradshaw, M.J., Bridge, G., Kuzemko, C. (2021): The geopolitics of energy system
transformation: A review. Geography Compass 15, e12580.
https://doi.org/10.1111/GEC3.12580
Boni, A., Velasco ,Diana, and Ghosh, B. (2025): A human capability approach to transformative
innovation policy. Theoretical insights and practical implications for directionality. Journal of
Responsible Innovation 12, 2440966. https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2024.2440966
Boon, W., Edler, J. (2018): Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new trends in
innovation policy. Science and Public Policy 45, 435–447.
https://doi.org/10.1093/SCIPOL/SCY014
Booth, K. (2007): Theory of World Security. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Brown, H.S., Vergragt, P., Green, K., Berchicci, L. (2003): Learning for Sustainability Transition through
Bounded Socio-technical Experiments in Personal Mobility. Technology Analysis & Strategic
Management 15, 291–315. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537320310001601496
Bulah, B.M., van Mierlo, B., Beumer, K., Gerritsen, A.L., Negro, S.O., Hekkert, M.P., Klerkx, L. (2024):
Diversity and directionality: friends or foes in sustainability transitions? Science and Public
Policy 51, 1075–1092. https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scae044
Buzan, B., Waever, O., de Wilde, J. (1998): Security: A New Framework for Analysis. Boulder.
Caravella, S., Costantini, V., Crespi, F. (2021): Mission-Oriented Policies and Technological
Sovereignty: The Case of Climate Mitigation Technologies. Energies 14, 6854.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en14206854

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 27
Caravella, S., Crespi, F., Cucignatto, G., Guarascio, D. (2024): Technological sovereignty and strategic
dependencies: The case of the photovoltaic supply chain. Journal of Cleaner Production 434,
140222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.140222
Cavelty, M.D., Egloff, F.J. (2019): The Politics of Cybersecurity: Balancing Different Roles of the State.
St Antony’s International Review 15, 37–57.
Caviggioli, F., De Marco, A., Gkotsis, P., Scellato, G., Vezzani, A. (2023): Dual use inventions:
identification and characterization using patent data. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 32, 804–825. https://doi.org/10.1080/10438599.2022.2026221
Cejudo, G.M., Michel, C.L. (2017): Addressing fragmented government action: coordination,
coherence, and integration. Policy Sci 50, 745–767. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-017-9281-5
Cerra, R., Crespi, F., Zezza, F. (2025): Coopetitive Technological Sovereignty: A Strategy to Reconcile
International Collaboration with Knowledge and Economic Security. Intereconomics Review of
European Economic Policy 60, 73–80.
Cincera, M., Caldarola ,Bernardo, Hottenrott ,Hanna, Lenihan ,Helena, Paterno Castello ,Pietro
Moncada, and Rentocchini, F. (2025): Call for papers: special issue on ‘innovation and strategic
autonomy for competitiveness.’ Economics of Innovation and New Technology 34, i–iii.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10438599.2025.2442244
Clement, J., Alarda, L., Ochojski, A., Crutzen, N. (2025): Engaging marginalized communities in multi-
level transformative innovation policy: The case of the Just Transition Fund. Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 212, 124002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2025.124002
Crespi, F., Caravella, S., Menghini, M., Salvatori, C. (2021): European Technological Sovereignty: An
Emerging Framework for Policy Strategy. Intereconomics 56, 348–354.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10272-021-1013-6
da Ponte, A., Leon, G., Alvarez, I. (2023): Technological sovereignty of the EU in advanced 5G mobile
communications: An empirical approach. Telecommunications Policy 47, 102459.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2022.102459
Damen, M. (2022): EU strategic autonomy 2013-2023: From concept to capacity, Briefing. European
Parliamentary Research Service, Brussels, Belgium.
de Graaff, S., Wanzenböck, I., Frenken, K. (2025): The politics of directionality in innovation policy
through the lens of policy process frameworks. Science and Public Policy scae083.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scae083
Depledge, D. (2023): Low-carbon warfare: climate change, net zero and military operations.
International Affairs iiad001. https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiad001
Diercks, G., Larsen, H., Steward, F. (2019): Transformative innovation policy: Addressing variety in an
emerging policy paradigm. Research Policy 48, 880–894.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESPOL.2018.10.028
Draghi, M. (2024): The future of European Competitiveness. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
Dupont, C. (2019): The EU’s collective securitisation of climate change. West European Politics 42,
369–390. https://doi.org/10.1080/01402382.2018.1510199

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 28
EASAC (2025): Security of Sustainable Energy Supplies. European Academies Science Advisory
Council.
European Commission (2025): Competitiveness Compass. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
European Commission (2022): RePowerEU Plan (Communication No. COM(2022) 230 final). European
Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
European Commission (2020): Critical Raw Materials Resilience: Charting a Path towards greater
Security and Sustainability, COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT, THE COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND THE
COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
European Commission (2020): Protect, prepare and transform Europe: recovery and resilience post
COVID-19. https://doi.org/10.2777/47346
Edler, J. (2024): Science, Research and Innovation performance of the EU 2024 report, in: Technology
Sovereignty of the EU: Needs, Concepts, Pitfalls and Ways Forward. European Commission,
Brussels, Belgium.
Edler, J., Blind, K., Frietsch, R., Kimpeler, S., Kroll, H., Lerch, C., Reiss, T., Roth, F., Schubert, T., Schuler, J.,
Walz, R. (2020): Technology Sovereignty: From Demand to Concept. Fraunhofer ISI, Karlsruhe,
Germany.
Edler, J., Blind, K., Kroll, H., Schubert, T. (2023): Technology sovereignty as an emerging frame for
innovation policy. Defining rationales, ends and means. Research Policy 52, 104765.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104765
Edler, J., James, A.D. (2015): Understanding the emergence of new science and technology policies:
Policy entrepreneurship, agenda setting and the development of the European Framework
Programme. Research Policy 44, 1252–1265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.12.008
Fagerberg, J. (2018): Mobilizing innovation for sustainability transitions: A comment on
transformative innovation policy. Research Policy 47, 1568–1576.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESPOL.2018.08.012
Farham, A., Kossman, S., van Rij, A. (2023): Preparing NATO for climate-related security challenges,
Chatham House Research Paper. Chatham House, London.
Flanagan, K., Uyarra, E., Laranja, M. (2011): Reconceptualising the ‘policy mix’ for innovation. Research
Policy 40, 702–713. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESPOL.2011.02.005
Floyd, R. (2019): The Morality of Security: A Theory of Just Securitisation. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Foray, D. (2019): On sector-non-neutral innovation policy: towards new design principles. Journal of
Evolutionary Economics 29, 1379–1397.
Foray, D., Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R. (2012): Public R&D and social challenges: What lessons from
mission R&D programs? Research Policy, The need for a new generation of policy instruments
to respond to the Grand Challenges 41, 1697–1702.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.07.011

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 29
Geels, F.W. (2005): Processes and patterns in transitions and system innovations: Refining the co-
evolutionary multi-level perspective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 72, 681–
696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2004.08.014
Geels, F.W., Turnheim, B., Asquith, M., Kern, F., Kivimaa, P. (2019): Sustainability transitions: policy and
practice, EEA Report No. 09/2019. European Environment Agency, Copenhagen.
Grillitsch, M., Hansen, T., Madsen, S., Godin, B., Vinck, D., Gaglio, G. (2020): How novel is
Transformative Innovation Policy? Papers in Innovation Studies 2020/8, Lund University, CIRCLE
- Centre for Innovation Research.
Grillitsch, M., Hansen, T., Coenen, L., Miörner, J., Moodysson, J. (2019). Innovation policy for system-
wide transformation: The case of strategic innovation programmes (SIPs) in Sweden. Research
Policy, 48(4), 1048-1061.
Grinbaum, A., Adomaitis, L. (2024): Dual use concerns of generative AI and large language models.
Journal of Responsible Innovation 11, 2304381.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2024.2304381
Haddad, C.R., Nakić, V., Bergek, A., Hellsmark, H. (2022): Transformative innovation policy: A
systematic review. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 43, 14–40.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EIST.2022.03.002
Hansen, L. (2012): Reconstructing desecuritisation: the normative-political in the Copenhagen School
and directions for how to apply it. Review of International Studies 38, 525–546.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210511000581
Heinrich, A., Szulecki, K. (2018): Energy Securitisation: Applying the Copenhagen School’s Framework
to Energy, in: Szulecki, K. (Ed.), Energy Security in Europe: Divergent Perceptions and Policy
Challenges. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 33–60.
Hekkert, M.P., Janssen, M.J., Wesseling, J.H., Negro, S.O. (2020): Mission-oriented innovation systems.
Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 34, 76–79.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.11.011
Hoogensen Gjørv, G. (2012): Security by any other name: Negative security, positive security, and a
multi-actor security approach. Review of International Studies 38, 835–859.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210511000751
Hoogensen Gjørv, G., Bilgic, A. (2022): Positive Security: Collective Life in an Uncertain World.
Routledge, Abingdon, Oxon.
Huang, C., Soete, L. (2025): Reconciling open science with technological sovereignty. Economics of
Innovation and New Technology 0, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/10438599.2025.2459764
Huda, M.S. (2024): Renewable energy diplomacy and transitions: An environmental peacebuilding
approach. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 50, 100815.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2024.100815
IRENA (2024): The Geopolitics of Energy Transition: Energy Security. IRENA, Abu Dhabi.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 30
Janssen, M., Wanzenböck, I., Pontikakis, D., Fuenfschilling, L. (2025): Governance arrangements for the
implementation of transformative innovation policy: Insights from a comparative case study.,
in: Edler, J., Matt, M., Bolt, W., Weber, K.M. (Eds.), Transformative Mission-Oriented Innovation
Policies: Revisiting the Role of Science, Technology and Innovation in Society. Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Janssen, M.J., Torrens, J., Wesseling, J.H., Wanzenböck, I. (2021): The promises and premises of
mission-oriented innovation policy—A reflection and ways forward. Science and Public Policy
48, 438–444. https://doi.org/10.1093/SCIPOL/SCAA072
Janssen, M.J., Wesseling, J., Torrens, J., Weber, K.M., Penna, C., Klerkx, L. (2023): Missions as boundary
objects for transformative change: understanding coordination across policy, research, and
stakeholder communities. Science and Public Policy 50, 398–415.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scac080
Jayaram, D. (2024): Shifting discourses of climate security in India: domestic and international
dimensions. Third World Quarterly 45, 2108–2126.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2024.2314003
Jayaram, D. (2023): ‘Climatizing’ Military Strategy? A Case Study of the Indian Armed Forces, in:
Aykut, S., Maertens, L. (Eds.), The Climatization of Global Politics. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 121–141. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-17895-5_7
Johnstone, P., McLeish, C. (2022): World wars and sociotechnical change in energy, food, and
transport: A deep transitions perspective. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 174,
121206. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TECHFORE.2021.121206
Johnstone, P., Newell, P. (2018): Sustainability transitions and the state. Environmental Innovation and
Societal Transitions 27, 72–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EIST.2017.10.006
Johnstone, P., Stirling, A., Sovacool, B. (2017): Policy mixes for incumbency: Exploring the destructive
recreation of renewable energy, shale gas ‘fracking,’ and nuclear power in the United Kingdom.
Energy Research and Social Science 33, 147–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.005
Juhász, R., Lane, N., Rodrik, D. (2024): The New Economics of Industrial Policy. Annual Review of
Economics 16, 213–242. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-081023-024638
Kattel, R., Soete, L. (2024): European security in a changing geo-political context: From the European
Research Area to the European Defence Research and Innovation Area and from Cohesion to
European territorial security policy (Policy Report), Policy Report 2024/12. UCL Institute for
Innovation and Public Purpose, London, UK.
Kattel, R., Mazzucato, M. (2018). Mission-oriented innovation policy and dynamic capabilities in the
public sector. Industrial and corporate change, 27(5), 787-801.
Kivimaa, P. (2024): Security in Sustainable Energy Transitions: Interplay between Energy, Security, and
Defence Policies in Estonia, Finland, Norway, and Scotland. Cambridge University Press (CUP),
Cambridge and New York.
Kivimaa, P. (2022): Transforming innovation policy in the context of global security. Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions 43, 55–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EIST.2022.03.005

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 31
Kivimaa, P., Brisbois, M.C., Jayaram, D., Hakala, E., Siddi, M. (2022): A socio-technical lens on security
in sustainability transitions: Future expectations for positive and negative security. Futures
102971.
Kivimaa, P., Entsalo, H. (2026): Synergies and tensions between decarbonisation, security and
strategic autonomy in EU energy policy. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 59,
101109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2026.101109
Kivimaa, P., Rogge, K.S. (2024): Pursuing sustainability transitions and open strategic autonomy. A
policy mix perspective on synergies and trade offs, JRC Working Paper Series For a Fair,
Innovative and Sustainable Economy. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
Kivimaa, P., Rogge, K.S. (2022): Interplay of policy experimentation and institutional change in
sustainability transitions: The case of mobility as a service in Finland. Research Policy 51,
104412. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESPOL.2021.104412
Kivimaa, P., Sivonen, M.H. (2024): “We rather not connect trade to politics, let alone geopolitics” –
The changing role of Russia as a landscape pressure for zero-carbon energy transitions. Energy
Research & Social Science 118, 103775. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2024.103775
Kivimaa, P., Sivonen, M.H. (2023): How will renewables expansion and hydrocarbon decline impact
security? Analysis from a socio-technical transitions perspective. Environmental Innovation and
Societal Transitions 48, 100744. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2023.100744
Kroll, H. (2024): Assessing Open Strategic Autonomy: A two-dimensional index to quantify EU-27
autonomy in industrial ecosystems and strategic technologies, JRC External Study Report.
European Commission, Luxembourg.
Kuhlmann, S., Rip, A. (2018): Next-generation innovation policy and Grand Challenges. Science and
Public Policy 45, 448–454. https://doi.org/10.1093/SCIPOL/SCY011
Kundu, O., Uyarra, E., Ortega-Argiles, R., Tirado, M.M., Kitsos, T., Yuan, P.-Y. (2025): Impacts of policy-
driven public procurement: a methodological review. Science and Public Policy 52, 50–64.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scae058
Kuus, M. (2017): Critical Geopolitics. Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.013.137
Laatsit, M., Grillitsch, M., Fünfschilling, L. (2025): Great expectations: The promises and limits of
innovation policy in addressing societal challenges. Research Policy 54, 105184.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2025.105184
Lafferty, W.M., Hovden, E. (2003): Environmental policy integration: Towards an analytical framework.
Environmental Politics 12, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644010412331308254
Larrue, P. (2021): The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges, OECD Science, Technology and
Industry Policy Papers. OECD, Paris.
Lee, J.-D., Kim, H., Si, S., Lee, S. (2024): Techno-nationalism to collaborative technology sovereignty.
Science and Public Policy 51, 1185–1190. https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scae046
Leijten, J. (2019): Innovation policy and international relations: directions for EU diplomacy. Eur J
Futures Res 7, 4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40309-019-0156-1

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 32
Lempinen, H. (2019): “Barely surviving on a pile of gold”: Arguing for the case of peat energy in 2010s
Finland. Energy Policy 128, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.12.041
Lindner, R., Edler, J., Daimer, S. (2024): Understanding Paradigm Change in Science, Technology, and
Innovation Policy: Between Science Push and Policy Pull, in: Systems and Innovation Research
in Transition. Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 7–31.
Lundvall, B.-Å. (2024): Transformative innovation policy – lessons from the innovation system
literature. Innovation and Development 14, 297–314.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2157930X.2022.2158996
Lundvall, B.Å., Borrás, S. (2005): Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, in: The Oxford Handbook
of Innovation. pp. 599–631.
Luo, Y., Van Assche, A. (2023): The rise of techno-geopolitical uncertainty: Implications of the United
States CHIPS and Science Act. J Int Bus Stud 54, 1423–1440. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-
023-00620-3
MacNeil, R., Beauman, M. (2022): Understanding resistance to just transition ideas in Australian coal
communities. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 43, 118–126.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EIST.2022.03.007
March, C., Schieferdecker, I. (2023): Technological Sovereignty as Ability, Not Autarky. International
Studies Review 25, viad012. https://doi.org/10.1093/isr/viad012
Mariotti, S. (2024): “Open strategic autonomy” as an industrial policy compass for the EU
competitiveness and growth: The good, the bad, or the ugly? J. Ind. Bus. Econ.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40812-024-00327-y
Martins, B.O., Mawdsley, J. (2021): Sociotechnical Imaginaries of EU Defence: The Past and the Future
in the European Defence Fund. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 59, 1458–1474.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcms.13197
Mazzucato, M. (2018a): Mission-oriented research & innovation in the European Union. European
Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
Mazzucato, M. (2018b): Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities. Industrial
and Corporate Change 27, 803–815. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty034
Mazzucato, M. (2016): From market fixing to market-creating: a new framework for innovation policy.
Industry and Innovation 23, 140–156. https://doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2016.1146124
Mazzucato, M. (2015): Building the Entrepreneurial State: A New Framework for Envisioning and
Evaluating a Mission-oriented Public Sector. Levy Economics Institute of Bard College Working
Paper 824.
McLeish, C., Johnstone, P., Schot, J. (2022): The changing landscape of deep transitions:
Sociotechnical imprinting and chemical warfare. Environmental Innovation and Societal
Transitions 43, 146–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2022.03.008
McLeish, C., Nightingale, P. (2007): Biosecurity, bioterrorism and the governance of science: The
increasing convergence of science and security policy. Research Policy 36, 1635–1654.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2007.10.003

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 33
Meershoek, N. (2023): Reciprocity as Security: Reconsidering Third Country Access to European
Critical Infrastructure Procurement. European Foreign Affairs Review 28.
Miró, J. (2023): Responding to the global disorder: the EU’s quest for open strategic autonomy.
Global Society 23, 315–335. https://doi.org/10.1080/13600826.2022.2110042
Molas-Gallart, J., Boni, A., Giachi, S., Schot, J. (2021): A formative approach to the evaluation of
Transformative Innovation Policies. Research Evaluation.
https://doi.org/10.1093/RESEVAL/RVAB016
Mowery, D.C. (2012): Defense-related R&D as a model for “grand Challenges” technology policies.
Research Policy 41, 1703–1715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.03.027
NATO (2024): NATO Climate Change and Security Impact Assessment. North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, Brussels, Belgium.
Nordling, N. (2024): Transformative Innovation Ecosystems. Fostering innovation to address grand
challenges. Tampere University Dissertations, 1085.
Oberthür, S. (2019): Hard or Soft Governance? The EU’s Climate and Energy Policy Framework for
2030. Politics and Governance 7, 17–27. https://doi.org/10.17645/pag.v7i1.1796
Pel, B. (2024): Is ‘digital transition’ a syntax error? Purpose, emergence and directionality in a
contemporary governance discourse. Journal of Responsible Innovation 11, 2390707.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2024.2390707
Peoples, C., Vaughan-Williams, N. (2015): Critical Security Studies: An Introduction. Routledge,
Abingdon, Oxon.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. (2025): Forging a sustainable future together: Cohesion Policy at its defining
moment. Regional Studies 59, 2552869. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2025.2552869
Roe, P. (2008): The ‘value’ of positive security. Review of International Studies 34, 777–794.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210508008279
Rogge, K.S., Reichardt, K. (2016): Policy mixes for sustainability transitions: An extended concept and
framework for analysis. Research Policy 45, 1620–1635.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RESPOL.2016.04.004
Schmitz, L., Seidl, T. (2023): As Open as Possible, as Autonomous as Necessary: Understanding the
Rise of Open Strategic Autonomy in EU Trade Policy. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies
61, 834–852. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcms.13428
Scholten, D., Bazilian, M., Overland, I., Westphal, K. (2020): The geopolitics of renewables: New board,
new game. Energy Policy 138, 111059. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.111059
Schot, J., Steinmueller, W.E. (2018a): Three frames for innovation policy: R&D, systems of innovation
and transformative change. Research Policy 47, 1554–1567.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.08.011
Schot, J., Steinmueller, W.E. (2018b): New directions for innovation studies: Missions and
transformations. Research Policy 47, 1583–1584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.08.014
Schwaag Serger, S., Shih, T. (2024): Finding effective and acceptable approaches to managing
international collaborations in a geopolitically turbulent world. Vinnova, Stockholm, Sweden.

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 34
Schwartz, R., Dodge, J., Smith, N.A., Etzioni, O. (2020): Green AI. Commun. ACM 63, 54–63.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3381831
Sengers, F., Turnheim, B., Berkhout, F. (2020): Beyond experiments: Embedding outcomes in climate
governance. Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space 239965442095386.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2399654420953861
Steinberg, D.A., Tan, Y. (2023): Public responses to foreign protectionism: Evidence from the US-
China trade war. Rev Int Organ 18, 145–167. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11558-022-09468-y
Stirling, A. (2019): How deep is incumbency? A ‘configuring fields’ approach to redistributing and
reorienting power in socio-material change. Energy Research & Social Science 58, 101239.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2019.101239
Stirling, A. (2009): Direction, Distribution and Diversity! Pluralising Progress in Innovation,
Sustainability and Development. STEPs Working Paper 32.
Torraco, R.J. (2005): ARTICLE Human Resource Development Review / September 2005 Torraco /
LITERATURE REVIEW GUIDELINES Writing Integrative Literature Reviews: Guidelines and
Examples. Human Resource Development Review 4, 356–367.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1534484305278283
Trippl, M., Soete, L., Kivimaa, P., Schwaag Serger, S., Kondouri, P., Pontikakis, D. (2024): Addressing
the regional dimension of open strategic autonomy and European green industrial policy: new
perspectives and pathways for impact. Joint Research Centre, European Commission.
Trombetta, M.J. (2009): Environmental security and climate change: analysing the discourse.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09557570802452920 21, 585–602.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09557570802452920
Turnheim, B., Sovacool, B.K. (2020): Forever stuck in old ways? Pluralising incumbencies in
sustainability transitions. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 35, 180–184.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.10.012
Uyarra, E., Bugge, M.M., Coenen, L., Flanagan, K., Wanzenböck, I. (2025): Geographies of mission-
oriented innovation policy. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 100970.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2025.100970
Vakulchuk, R., Overland, I., Scholten, D. (2020): Renewable energy and geopolitics: A review.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 122, 109547.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109547
van Oers, L., Feola, G., Runhaar, H., Moors, E. (2023): Unlearning in sustainability transitions: Insight
from two Dutch community-supported agriculture farms. Environmental Innovation and
Societal Transitions 46, 100693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2023.100693
Weber, K.M., Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for
transformative change: Combining insights from innovation systems and multi-level
perspective in a comprehensive “failures” framework. Research Policy 41, 1037–1047.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 92
Fraunhofer ISI | 35
Wiarda, M., Janssen, M.J., Coenen, T.B.J., Doorn, N. (2024): Responsible mission governance: An
integrative framework and research agenda. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions
50, 100820. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2024.100820
Wiertz, T., Kuhn, L., Mattissek, A. (2023): A turn to geopolitics: Shifts in the German energy transition
discourse in light of Russia’s war against Ukraine. Energy Research & Social Science 98, 103036.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2023.103036
Wittmann, F., Hufnagl, M., Lindner, R., Roth, F., Edler, J. (2021): Governing varieties of mission-
oriented innovation policies: A new typology. Science and Public Policy 48, 727–738.
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scab044
Zervos, V., Siegel, D.S. (2008): Technology, security, and policy implications of future transatlantic
partnerships in space: Lessons from Galileo. Research Policy 37, 1630–1642.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2008.06.008
