
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75

Putting Mission-Oriented Innovation Policies to
Work: A case study of the German High-Tech
Strategy 2025

Florian Roth, Florian Wittmann, Miriam Hufnagl, Ralf Lindner

Karlsruhe, July 2022

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====
Responsible for content
Florian Roth, Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe, Germany
Florian Wittmann, Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe, Germany
Miriam Hufnagl, Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe; Deutsches Elektronen-
Synchrotron DESY, Hamburg, Germany
Ralf Lindner, Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation Research ISI, Karlsruhe, Germany
Recommended citation
Florian Roth, Miriam Hufnagl, F lorian Wittmann, Ralf Lindner (2021): Putting Mission-Oriented Innovation Policies
to Work: A case study of the German High-Tech Strategy 2025, Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Paper, No.75. Karlsruhe
Fraunhofer ISI.

For further information, please visit our project website https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/en/competence-center/poli-
tik-gesellschaft/projekte/htf2025.html
Published
July 2022
ISSN
1612-1430

===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | I

Contents
Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... 1
1 Introduction.................................................................................................................... 2
2 (New) mission-orientation .......................................................................................... 4
2.1 The high hopes of MOIP.................................................................................................................. 4
2.2 Key processes and steps for workable missions........................................................................ 5
3 Case study: The missions of the German High-Tech Strategy .......................... 7
3.1 Mission Types and case selection ................................................................................................. 7
3.2 Mission formulation ......................................................................................................................... 9
3.3 Mission design ................................................................................................................................. 10
3.4 Mission implementation ................................................................................................................ 12
4 Implications for policy and governance ................................................................ 14
5 Literature ....................................................................................................................... 16

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | II

Figures
Figure 1: Missions as multiple translation processes ........................................................................................... 5
Figure 2: Missions of the HTS 2025 ............................................................................................................................ 7
Figure 3: Mission types HTS 2025 ............................................................................................................................... 8
Figure 4: Type of policy instruments for selected missions of the HTS 2025 ........................................... 10
Figure 5: Mission inputs by ministries ..................................................................................................................... 12

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 1

Abstract
Over the last years, numerous national governments as well as the European Union have initiated
so-called missions to guide transformation processes and tackle grand challenges, such as climate
change, digitalization and an aging society. Previous research on mission-oriented innovation pol-
icies (MOIP) has mainly focused on conceptual reflections about mission goals and early stages of
the implementation process, but paid little attention to the actual implementation of missions. The
aim of the paper is to untangle and reveal the complex processes involved in developing and ap-
plying MOIP concepts in political practice (e.g. the role of policy instruments and actors) and pro-
vide insights for the advancement of mission approaches. To do so, we focus on the three stages
of mission formulation, mission design and mission implementation. The three-fold framework al-
lows delineating different areas of negotiation and contestation, exploring potential bottlenecks
when bringing missions into action.
The empirical part of the paper draws on the case of the German High -Tech Strategy 2025 (HTS)
which entails twelve missions across different sectors. Even though the German Government offi-
cially claims that the current HTS is guided by a mission-driven approach and 12 missions are de-
tailed, the analysis finds considerable problems when it comes to translating this into practice in
Germany's political landscape. Our findings call for a conceptual systemic underpinning of MOIP,
which contributes to a reduction of complexity and provide better access to understanding the
interplay of different instruments and their mix. This way, the discussion paper aims to contribute
to a better understanding of the preconditions as well as the main challenges in putting missions
to work and to inform the next generation of innovation policies that are currently being issued in
Germany and elsewhere.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 2

1 Introduction
Over the last years, numerous national governments as well as the European Union have initiated
so-called missions to guide transformation processes and tackle grand challenges, such as climate
change, digitalization and an aging society (Larrue 2021). As noted by Janssen et al. (2021), existing
research on mission-oriented innovation policies (MOIP) has mainly focused on conceptual reflec-
tions about mission goals and early stages of the implementation process, but paid little attention
to the actual implementation of missions. At the same time , the implementation of MOIP still re-
mains a challenge for policy-makers (OECD and the Danish Design Center 2022 Lindner et al. 2021).
To address this gap, more empirical research is needed to better understand how missions are
shaped by political actors as well as societal stakeholders and ultimately turned into policy practice.
Identifying challenges along the policy process is an important step towards making mission ap-
proaches useful for tackling future challenges.
Therefore, the aim of the paper is to untangle and reveal the complex processes involved in devel-
oping and applying MOIP concepts in political practice (e.g. the role of policy instruments and
actors) and provide insights for the advancement of mission approaches. To do so, we focus on the
three stages of mission for mulation, mission design and mission implementation. The three -fold
framework allows to delineate different areas of negotiation and contestation, exploring potential
bottlenecks when bringing missions into action (Wittmann et al. 2021b).
1
The empirical part of the paper examines the case of the German High-Tech Strategy 2025 (HTS).
First introduced in 2006 , the HTS serves as the flagship research and innovation strategy of the
German Federal government ever since, bundling all related activities in one comprehensive initia-
tive. The first edition of the HTS focused on pushing 17 key technologies and the underl ying re-
search disciplines. Already back then though, the claim was made, that the HTS takes holistic per-
spective of all departments combined in one framework ("a coordinated innovation policy is more
necessary than ever”, own translation, based on BMBF 2006, p. 7).
In 2010, the German government undertook a first reorientation, moving away from a narrow focus
on technology fields towards an increased emphasis on societal challenges (HTS 2020). Most nota-
bly, the willingness to follow a mission-oriented approach was declared for the first time, however
without further specifying this new approach and its implications for policies. While the third edition
of the HTS mentioned societal actors as important stakeholders, missions to address societal chal-
lenges in different domains were only introduced in 2018 with the HTS 2025, the 4
th edition of the
strategy.
Even though the German government officially claims that the current HTS is guided by a mission-
driven approach and 12 missions are detailed, the analysis finds considerable problems when it
comes to translating this into practice in Germany's political landscape. The analysis builds on pub-
licly available data as well as information obtained from governmental sources, project execution
agencies and independe nt experts. Further, it draws on the insights from several workshops in
which the research team at Fraunhofer ISI was involved. An in-depth analysis of four selected mis-
sions aims to contribute to a better understanding of the preconditions as well as the main chal-
lenges in putting missions to work and to inform the next generation of innovation policies . In

1 While the concept shares similarities with the distinction between strategic coordination, policy co-ordination and policy im-
plementation by Larrue (2021) it puts more emphasis on the different arenas of negotiation and potential translation prob-
lems.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 3

Germany, for example, the Federal government is currently drafting a new "future strategy for re-
search and innovation. " (BMBF 2022) The discussion paper highlights several key aspects that
require particular attention in this process.
The findings confirm previous research according to which missions are not designed "from
scratch", but are embedded in a context of existing policies and instruments (Larrue 2021, p. 9). This
has profound implications for MOIP as these will be characterized by different modes of institu-
tional change as well as contestation and negotiation processe s amongst actors involved (Witt-
mann et al. 2021c) . This observation points to the nece ssity that these different steps of policy
making (formulation, design, and implementation) are important and distinct features that differ
between missions (also due to underlying challenges that they should overcome). These processes
demand attention from practitioners and researchers alike. Only then missions can live up to their
promise and foster change or even real transformation in the near future. This calls for a conceptual
systemic underpinning of MOIP (Wittmann et al. 2022) which contributes to a reduction of com-
plexity and provide a better access to understanding the interplay of different instruments and their
mix.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Chapter 2 provides an overview of the main
characteristics of MOIP and what sets the new missions apart from previous policy approaches.
Further, key challenges that typically complicate the application of MOIP concepts are discussed.
Subsequently, section 3 presents the empirical findings. The analysis is structured along the differ-
ent translation processes identified as relevant for missions, distinguishing between the phases of
mission formulation, mission design and mission implementation Finally, in section 4, we discuss
main insights gained from the empirical analysis a nd what they mean for the theory and practice
of MOIP.

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 4

2 (New) mission-orientation
Since about the early 2000s, a paradigm shift in STI policy strategies has taken place, complement-
ing and in part replacing the rationales of STI policy interventions to add ress market failures and
systemic deficits of innovation systems with the rational of addressing societal challenges. Instead
of primarily aiming at economic objectives such as growth and competitiveness, research and in-
novation should increasingly contribute to solving pressing environmental and societal problems
(Daimer et al. 2012; Lindner et al. 2016; Weber et al. 2012). This general idea of directionality in STI
policy was broadly taken up by many governments, particularly in the OECD world. However, in
many instances STI policy approaches trying to address societal challenges seemed under-concep-
tualized, since remained u nclear which policies were supposed to bring about transformative
changes. Further, they appear as overburdened with expectations: How should STI generate the
required impact for society at large? Against this background, the concept of MOIP was introduced
as a way to operationalise the broad, but unspecific grand societal challenges into manageable
packages of problems (Lindner et al. 2021, p. 6).
2.1 The high hopes of MOIP
The concept of missions in the context of STI policy is not new. However, the "old" missions of the
1950s and 1960s, for example, primarily aimed at solving clearly defined technological objectives
(Foray et al. 2012). The current, new mission-orientation differs significantly from previous genera-
tions, as it is much broader in many respects: the width of (societal) goals, the variety of involved
stakeholders, the spectrum of disciplines and sectors involved, as well as the breadth of the required
policy mix.
The popularity of Mission-oriented innovation policies (MOIP) was connected to the hope that this
approach could help to address pressing societal challenges by defining clear and ambitious goals
and comprehensive strategies to reach these goals (Kattel et al. 2018; Mazz ucato 2018b) . Im-
portantly, the new generation of missions not only differs from its predecessors in terms of its ends,
but also with regards to its means, especially the role of STI policy. Similar to traditional missions,
also the new MOIP tries to " mobilize science, technology and innovation" (Larrue 2021, p. 15, see
also Mazzucato 2018a; Kuittinen et al. 2018b, p. 7). However, the key question is, whether STI policy
is expected to achieve the necessary changes alone (cf. Foray et al. 2012; Weber et al. 2014, p. 6).
Given the complexity of current societal challenges und the urgent need to realize changes in the
way production and consumption in our societies are organized, significant system transformations
are needed. These transformations typically reach beyond the established realms of research and
innovation policy. Thus, MOIP that aim to contribute to these transformations require clear direc-
tionality of science, technology and innovation, coordinated cross-sectoral action and broad actor
mobilization (Kuittinen et al. 2018a; Lindner et al. 2021). At the same time, not all missions neces-
sarily have transformative ambitions. In order to capture this empirical heterogeneity of missions
Wittmann et al. (2021a) extend the mission typology by (Polt et al. 2019), distinguishing between
four ideal types of missions: Accelerator Type missions pursue a problem -oriented approach and
emphasize in particular the importance of research as a means to initiate the desired changes; the
starting point of Accelerator Type 2 missions tend to be technological developments that have been
identified as possible solutions to the underlying problems. The aim is to apply these technological-
scientific solutions and accelerate their diffusion; Transformer type 1 are based on a solution -ori-
ented approach, these missions formulate transformative goals that are to be achieved through the
targeted combination of STI policy with other instruments; finally Trans former type 2 missions are

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 5

more problem-oriented than solution-oriented compared to Transformer type 1 , i.e. the path to-
wards an adequate solution has not yet been identified. At the same time, the transformative claim
of this type is more comprehensive, as it includes behavioral changes and also possible redistribu-
tion effects. Particularly if missions aim at transformative goals, this might lead to unrealistic expec-
tations, as grand societal challenges hardly can be solved by the means of STI policy alone . This
also has profound implications for political ownership and the ability to mobilize relevant stake-
holder, including rather classic technology driven Accelerator features to comparatively ambitious
systemic transformative missions.
2.2 Key processes and steps for workable missions
Missions are complex and dynamic policies associated with multiple challenges when it comes to
their realization. While understanding the development of missions as an iterative process involving
multiple feedback loops, we propose to analytically distinguish three main process elements char-
acterizing missions as interconnected translation processes, reaching from mission formulation
over mission design to mission implementation (Wittmann et al. 2021b). We understand missions
as multiple negotiation processes at different levels in varying actor constellations. In effect, the
process of goal formulation and its subsequent translation into an implementation strategy is far
more than a mere administrative -technical process (Edler et al. 2020) . Each of these translation
processes requires a different lens and may expose the involved actors to different requirements.
Creating awareness for these different roles and their respective challenges can support mission
owners and stakeholders to better grasp the processes and disentangle the complexity of MOIP. At
the same time, it can help to avoid the distinct challenges at each level that may constitute an
obstacle to mission realization. Figure 1 summarizes the key characteristics of the different transla-
tion processes, the involved actors and key issues of negotiation.
Figure 1: Missions as multiple translation processes

Source: Figure based on Wittmann et al. (2021b) with some modifications.
Mission formulation
The first translation process is about breaking down a societal challenge into a specific mission. This
phase of a mission policy represents the strategic and highly political decision -making process of
choosing and 'narrowing down' (Larrue 2021, p. 87) of societal challenges to arrive at dedicated
and clearly defined mission goals. While this is carried out mainly at the strategic level of politics,

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 6

wider stakeholders can be involved to varying degrees. Depending on the issues at stake, this trans-
lation step might be influenced by public debate. Key questions cover the directionality, scope and
level of ambition of a mission. Missions can and should be selective in addressing only parts of a
societal challenge, define more or less ambitious goals, or reflect different understandings of how
to achieve these changes (cf. e.g. Edler et al. 2020). Moreover, it might be contested to what extent
and when to involve a wider range of stakeholders into the formulation process. While allowing for
broader participation from the very beginning can potentially increase legitimacy and facilitates the
inclusion of different actors' perspective, such an approach might entail the risk of strengthening
vested interests and veto players, uneven representation of key stakeholders, a watering down of
the level of ambition, etc. Pitfalls connected to the mission formulation process are the emergence
of incoherent, unrealistic , non-ambitious or unclear goals that could negatively affect the legiti-
macy, directionality and mobilizing capacity of a mission. In line with this, research has highlighted
the importance of the process of mission formulation (Janssen et al. 2020; Wittmann et al. 2020) .
Deficiencies and shortcomings occurring at this stage can hardly be compensated for in ensuing
process steps of MOIP.
Mission design
Building on the choice of mission goals, the second translation takes place when turning the stra-
tegic goals into a set of policy instruments and activities that are intended to achieve these aims.
Contrary to the previous stage, this involves to a lesser extent the strategic level in publ ic admin-
istration but rather operative units in ministries that are responsible for funding programs, as well
as public actors. The negotiation concerning the design involves three interrelated aspects. Firstly,
MOIP can unleash their potential for transformative change at best if private actors are mobilized
alongside public contributions for achieving the mission goals. Secondly, mission design requires
the development of an appropriate and coherent instrument mix that is in line with the formulated
goals. Missions in this context need to balance between utilizing existing instruments/policies and
their purposeful combination with new approaches, while creating sufficient room for experimen-
tation without losing directionality. Finally, mission design requires to clarify responsibilities for the
later process of mission implementation and the creation of appropriate means for mission man-
agement and monitoring. In sum, the main challenge will be to develop a mission design with a
dedicated instrument mix that is closely aligned with the previously formulated goals and prepares
the ground for the implementation phase.
Mission implementation
The final translation process refers to the stage of implementation, when actually carrying out, co-
ordination and revising the instruments and activities in the context of a mission. This translation
of planned instruments into activities mainly occurs at the operative level of ministries and other
mission owners that are responsible for the relevant instruments such as fundi ng agencies. Key
questions in this process step relate to the way instruments are implemented, if they are in line with
the postulated goals and to the coordination between those instruments. Moreover, an area of
negotiation remains the question to what extent insights that are gained during mission implemen-
tation actually feed back into the implementation, mission design, and mission goals, balancing
experimental approaches with directionality and ensuring a constant alignment with mission goals.
In consequence, to unleash the potential impacts of a mission, the implementation is a key prereq-
uisite building upon properly formulated mission goals and a sound mission design.
The three-staged model of missions provides a valuable basis to structure the empirical analysis of
the German HTS and identify key challenges in applying MOIP concepts.

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 7

3 Case study: The missions of the German High-Tech Strategy
3.1 Mission Types and case selection
Germany has a long history of attempts to employ R&I policies for political and social purposes. As
described above, since four legislative terms the HTS has served as Germany's Federal Govern-
ments' central STI framework. With the introduction of the latest edition in 2018 (HTS 2025), a
mission-oriented approach was explicitly put center stage, defining twelve specific missions to ad-
dress key societal challenges across the three broad areas of technology and mobility, sustainability
and environment, and health and change (BMBF 2018).
Figure 2: Missions of the HTS 2025

Source: Wittmann et al. (2021a, p.732)
The twelve missions of the HTS 2025 differ significantly in regards to their goals, the means as well
as their institutional set up. Applying the mission typology of Wittmann et al. (2021a), more than
half of the missions fit the category of Transformer missions, whereas one third focus on applying
selected technologies as solutions to respective problems, while one mission has a strong research
orientation. Notably four missions are associated with the challenges regarding sustainabil ity,
whereas two missions are dedicated to improve mobility and health respectively. In the case of the
latter, the missions display characteristics of both Accelerator Types , which hints at a strong focus
on research and technological-scientific solution diffusion. On the other hand, Transformer Types 1
and 2 are dominant in the field of sustainability which ties in with the more systemic and behavioral
changes aspired in this field.

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 8

Figure 2: Mission types HTS 2025

Source: Roth et al. (2021, p. 23)
For the in-depth analysis of the HTS 2025, four cases were selected, each representing one of the
four ideal types of the typology introduced above (Wittmann et al. 2021a):
• Accelerator Type 1 – Combating cancer: A mission that builds upon the focus on healthcare in
previous HTS. Given its emphasis on research activities as a means to combat cancer, it has
been classified as an Accelerator Type 1, while exhibiting elements (strengthening of preven-
tion) that aim for behavioral change.
• Accelerator Type 2 – Achieving substantial greenhouse gas neutrality in industry: Contributing
to address the Grand Challenge of achieving sustainability and mitigating global climate
change, the mission strives for bringing new solutions for CO2 emissions in industry to appli-
cation. Since the mission does not aim for a comprehensive transformation but focuses on in-
cremental solutions, it can be considered as an Accelerator Type 2 mission:
• Transformer Type 1 – Creating sustainable circular economies: A second mission linked to the
challenge of sustainability focusing on the re-use of materials and a significant increase of the
raw material productivity. It entails considerable transformative elements, by aiming to alter
existing structures of the socio-technical system and therefore qualifies as a Transformer Type
1 mission.
• Transformer Type 2 – Ensuring good living and working conditions throughout the country:
While the question of equal living conditions has been deeply rooted in the German political
discourse, a mission that aims to influence factors constituting good living conditions is a
novelty in the German HTS 2025. Given its broad approach, the complexity of actor constella-
tions and the anticipated changes to human behavior, it represents a particularly complex
mission that falls into the category of a Transformer Type 2.

In this context, however, it is important to keep in mind that missions may contain elements from
different approaches, deviating from the ideal types of the mission typology.

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 9

3.2 Mission formulation
The goals of the missions of the HTS 2025 mostly relate to grand societal challenges such as sus-
tainability, demographic change, or living conditions where the need for change is in principle
broadly supported. While the HTS 2025 covers a variety of topics, the potential interactions and
tensions between different missions do not seem to have been sufficiently anticipated. In most of
the cases we also observe a thematic continuity with regard to earlier editions of the High- Tech
Strategy (BMBF 2006, 2010, 2014), allowing to build on previous activities and structures.
On the other side, also several new topics like artific ial intelligence have been introduced, which
were not deeply anchored in previous editions of the HTS. These have the potential to broaden the
traditionally strong technological focus towards a more problem-oriented perspective, as implied
by the concept of MOIP. However, both approaches – the further development of existing strategies
and tapping into new fields – come with their specific challenges. Missions relating to existing strat-
egies might get trapped into path- dependencies that impede shifts towards new transformative
paths. In consequence, such missions face the risk of not providing more than a reframing of exist-
ing policies under the label of mission-orientation. On the other hand, the formulation of missions
that address topics which were not at the core of the HTS before entails the risk of duplicating
efforts of established sectoral policies. At least some of the missions of the HTS 2025, the added
value of a new mission remains rather unclear, because they do not appear to fill valuable niches
or develop a strong narrative to ensure broad actor mobilization and visibility. Potentially, this may
reduce legitimacy and create conflicts between different actors about responsibilities.
The goals of the missions under study are generally ambitious, aiming to transform or at least
change complex socio-technical systems that clearly reach beyond the STI sphere. At the same time,
the selected cases have different understandings of the way towards necessary changes. Generally,
the investigated missions tend to translate complex societal challenges into rather narrowly defined
missions. In many cases, even missions with a transformative understanding are primarily oriented
towards classical research and innovation actors, whereas other potentially relevant actors (e.g.,
regional authorities, consumers, other stakeholders) play a more limited role. At the same time,
even for an accelerator mission there is reference to goals related to behavioral change. A case in
point is the mission on combating cancer, whi ch is explicitly framed as a research strategy (NDK
2019), but still puts strong emphasis on strengthening prevention measures and altering public
perceptions and debates. However, such a broad approach necessarily involves sectoral policies,
particularly when touching upon questions of behavioral change and systemic transformation.
While many of the HTS missions obviously aim to address societal problems, they still strongly rely
on STI policy means. Consequently, effective integration with sectoral policies remains rather
patchy.
While exhibiting a certain degree of directionality and intentionality, the cases also indicate consid-
erable room for improvement in these regards. While some of the missions are based on a quanti-
fication of mission goals and describe interim goals, in other cases neither goals nor the underlying
concepts are clearly specified. The absence of clear definition of goals undermines the mission de-
sign and implementation process and creates considerable obstacles for monitoring whether a mis-
sion is "on track" or not. In this context, the shift towards societal challenges necessitates an oper-
ationalization and definition of multi-dimensional and ambiguous, often nearly intangible concepts
such as good quality of life or avoidable cases of cancer. Yet, only if these concepts are specified, it
is possible to define mission goals and derive meaningful indicators. Another shortcoming ob-
served was that most missions do not specify interim goals. Given the long -term orientation of
most missions, usually exceeding electoral periods, a lack of intermediary steps makes it hard to
keep direction.

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 10

Moreover, processes of mission formulation mainly occurred within the confines of the HTS, limiting
the possibilities to involve stakeholders in the formulation process. The "National Decade against
cancer" (NDK) as the main vehicle for the mission on combating cancer illustrates the strengths and
weaknesses of a more flexible approach. While "outsourcing" the goal formulation process to the
NDK and its partners can be assumed to have generated more commitment among involved stake-
holders, the nested character makes it more difficult to clearly identify the goals of the mission
which – in practice – are fulfilled through the NDK. Overall, despite a generally high level of legiti-
macy, the formulation processes of the missi ons under study did not provide sufficient guidance
for the later processes of mission design and actor mobilization. Besides problems in the goal for-
mulation, tensions between the ambition for transformative change and the anticipated way and
scope of initiating such changes are evident.
3.3 Mission design
The delineation of relevant instruments contributing to the HTS 2025 missions appears to be poorly
defined in most cases or rather an act of subsuming existing and planned policy instruments under
a mission headline without a necessary view to the overall composition. So far, varying enumera-
tions of policy instruments associated with individual missions are presented which a ppear rather
arbitrary in the majority of the studied cases. The current practice, however, complicates the assess-
ment with regard to the question to what extent the instrument mix is crafted to suit the individual
mission goals as well as the shared targets cutting across missions, because no pathways are avail-
able that could provide a clear vision how policy input is intended to achieve impact. To enable an
assessment of the current mission design, the research team reconstructed lists of policy instru-
ments, combining different official sources published by the BMBF and additional information pro-
vided by ministerial units in charge.
Figure 4: Type of policy instruments for selected missions of the HTS 2025

Source: Roth et al. 2021, p.28

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 11

The first insight regarding the design is that distributive instruments are obviously the predominant
method in the context of MOIP. This finding might not be surprising given the understanding of
the HTS 2025 as a research and innovation strategy. It does reveal, however, a stark contrast to the
narrative of the whole of government approach throughout the strategy itself. So far, the deliberate
inclusion of other types of instruments such as regulation and discursive means 2 as part of a co-
herent policy mix, carrying substantial potential for achieving the desired transformative and be-
havioral change, has not been part of the HTS approach. Particularly with a view to Transformer
Type missions such as Creating sustainable circular economies (T1) or Ensuring good living condi-
tions (T2), a significantly diversified set of instruments is likely to bring about more impact prospec-
tively. In general, the policy instruments in place display a seemingly high specificity with the po-
tential impact pathways identified by the research, as indicated by the calculation of the Average
Instrument Diversity (AID) index (Fernández-i-Marín et al. 2021).
3 From this perspective, the overall
specificity of instrument towards goals appears to be relatively similar and high for all missions
under study.
This alignment of policy instruments also needs to take into account the effective integration of
long-standing instruments with newly introduced ones. Policy layering is a fast way of designing
policies and not necessarily problematic since policies are hardly ever built "from scratch"
4 (Larrue
2021). Nevertheless, if efforts and processes to align policy instruments of different strategy gen-
erations with the specific goals of a mission are lacking, the materialization of real impact by MOIP
is at stake. This highlights the crucial role of evaluation and a culture of flexibility, reflection and
experimental learning as well as the determination to learn from mistakes and eventually adjust
policy instruments (Lindner et al. 2021, pp. 31–33).
Another key observation derived from the case studies is the rather strong top -down ministerial
perspective regarding mission content and resources, with most stakeholders beyond government
merely acting as funding beneficiaries. Burden sharing in terms of resource mobilization, capacities
and joint ownership across ministries and stakeholders of the socio-technological system concern-
ing the mission appears as rather limited. As can be seen from Figure 5, the only mission being
capable of mobilizing inputs from non- federal ministries is the mission on combating cancer,
whereas stakeholders in the other mission mainly appear as beneficiaries of support schemes or
dialogue partners. The potential to mobilize a wide range of stakeholders and bringing together
resources of public and private actors as a main promise of MOIP only appears to manifest itself
only to a very limited extent. If government truly wants to deliver on the promise of MOIP to over-
come societal challenges, it ought to be the orchestrator of change by actively encouraging a wider
range of actors to contribute their resources to gain the necessary momentum.
5 In order to achieve
this, a clear and compelling mission narrative and goals are necessary. In consequence, this calls for
"processes that effectively contribute to committing stakeholders from the very beginning of a
mission" (Wittmann et al. 2021c, p. 77).

2 For a more detailed description of policy instrument types please refer to Wittmann et al. (2021c, p. 17) or Hufnagl (2010).
3 The AID has been proposed for the systemic study and comparison of policy portfolios, exploring to what degree govern-
ments address goals repeatedly with the same instrument or rely on specifically-targeted instruments for different problems.
Higher levels of AID are generally assumed to reflect a better defined instrument portfolio and corresponds with a higher ef-
fectiveness of policies due to a certain level of "instrument customization" and not necessarily one-size-fits-all solutions.
4 In the case of the four missions, only the mission on combating cancer relies on completely new policy instruments imple-
mented after 2018.
5 These aspects are also strongly emphasized by the advisory board to the HTS 2025 (Hightech Forum 2021) and by the EFI
Commission (Expertenkommission Forschung und Innovation 2021).

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 12

Figure 3: Mission inputs by ministries

Source: Roth et al. 2021, p. 306
3.4 Mission implementation
For the successful implementation of MOIP, it is necessary to synchronize, integrate, monitor and
adapt a broad range of instruments and activities in different policy areas. In the same vein, many
missions of the HTS 2025 extend well beyond the STI policy field and, depending on the mission,
must be interlinked more or less closely with specialized and sectoral policies. As a general rule, the
clearer missions are defined and designed, as well as responsibilities set, the easier is their imple-
mentation. As discussed in the previous sections, the goals and instruments of the HTS 2025 are
only party specified and mission ownership is not always clear. In consequence, the mission imple-
mentation is a particularly challenging part of the HTS 2025.
Following the so-called departmental principle (Ressortprinzip), the primary responsibility for sec-
toral policies in Germany's political system rests with individual ministries, which enjoy a compara-
tively high degree of political autonomy. Therefore, it would be illusive, for example, attempting to
introduce innovations to the food production system without a clear commitment from and sub-
stantial involvement of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, or endeavouring to transform the
mobility system without a strong buy-in from the Ministry of Transport, which both have a pivotal
role in the respective policy domains. As a consequence, the implementation of MOIP in the Ger-
man context first of all means to coordinate the priorities and interests of different ministries. Im-
portant prerequisites for interdepartmental coordination processes are laid down in the joint rules
of procedure of the federal ministries. In reality, cooperation and coordination are often compli-
cated by tendencies towards interdepartmental competition. Since ministries are generally orga-
nized along hierarchical structures, ensuring issue-specific coordination on the working level across
different departments (and sometimes even within one ministry) is a challenging task. The imple-
mentation of some missions under study is organized through an inter -ministerial coordination
group that brings together working level staff from all ministries involved in the mission (typically

6 In the cases of CO2 emissions in industry and Circular economy the data includes policy strategies. Percentages are based on
number of instruments not their financial volume.

===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 13

two to three ministries). However, this is not the case for all missions: For other missions, 'cooper-
ation in delineation' and forms of negative coordination (Braun 2008) can be observed. These rather
traditional practises of policy making ultimately result in the division of tasks with separate respon-
sibilities between entities, little productive interactions, and policy fragmentation (Lindner 2012). In
those cases in which missions are subject of coordination groups, these meet with varying regularity
to discuss and decide on the operational questions related to the mission, but no further insights
on tasks, topics and mission dynamics are publicly available. Overall, frequency and intensity of
inter-ministerial or trans-ministerial activities appear to be rather low.
An interesting exception in this regard is the mission on combating cancer. This mission is coordi-
nated by a specialized organisational unit within the BMBF, a project group NDK that organizes
work on the "decade against cancer", the main vehicle of the mission. This institutional "home base"
for the mission management and the shift towards a project-oriented working mode with thematic
working groups appears to have contributed to a compa ratively close collaboration among in-
volved ministries and stakeholders, thereby providing substantial input to the development of the
mission.

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 14

4 Implications for policy and governance
Our findings have several implications for a successful formulation, design and implementation of
future missions. First and foremost, the review of the German case makes it clear that the formula-
tion of missions is a critical moment of utmost importance for the success of a mission that should
be given much more attention. Mission owners should strive for a quantification (or at least quali-
fication) of goals that are to be achieved within a specific time frame, as well as a specification of
underlying concepts. As mission goals usually will exceed electoral terms, it is moreover necessary
to also define interim goals. Even more important than good goals however is a sound strategic
process for the formulation of missions, building on a thorough preparation by the political actors
in charge. A coherent and systemic mission formulation process is a basic prerequisite for the mo-
bilization of additional political actors, the inclusion of important stakeholder groups and, last but
not least, for public mission communication. Although most missions within the HTS 2025 pro-
claimed transformative goals, the involvement of stakeholders in the formulation process remained
rather limited, with little buy-in beyond the classic R&I actors. Whether the HTS's follow-up strategy,
which the German government is curren tly drafting, will overcome the predecessor's limitations
remains to be seen.
Another implication relates to the pivotal moment in every mission when goals are translated into
concrete activities by the ministries and other stakeholders involved in implem entation. We con-
tend that this step should consider a broad mix of instruments and should be based on systemati-
cally derived assumptions about the link between measures, effects and the context. To this end,
strategies like the new German "future strategy" should rely on the development of impact path-
ways, and combine these pathways with an active portfolio management of policy instruments, to
maximize the synergies between instruments and ensure that activities are aligned with the mission
goals (Wittmann et al. 2022). Missions are more than the sum of individual instruments and only
unfold their effects through the interaction of the various contributions of different actors. There-
fore, the process of mission design should involve relevant stakeholders in a more comprehensive
way than what we observed for the HTS2025 , to ensure their commitment and contri bution and
incorporate their knowledge.
Finally, mission owners need to pay particular attention to ensure an intensive coordination and
monitoring throughout the entire mission life-cycle. For successful mission implementation , the
analysis demonstrated the importance of constantly gathering relevant information on the progress
of the various elements of the mission as well as facilitating the exchange between different actors
in order to adapt and further develop the mission, for example , when context conditions change.
To fulfill these requirements, sufficient resources and competencies for an active mission manage-
ment body need to be provided. Without a clear operational management or administrative struc-
tures equipped with sufficient resources and capacities, successful mission implementation cannot
be expected. Further, we deem it necessary to establish functional monitoring mechanisms that
allow to keep track of missions down to the level of individual instruments in a timely, transparent
and comprehensive way. This should be complemented by dedicated advisory bodies for individual
missions, to ensure the continuous involvement of relevant stakeholders and experts in the ongoing
implementation processes.
Implications for governance of missions
Taking MOIP serious entails substantial investments, as the benefits of a mission-oriented approach
do not come at zero costs, but require considerable administrative capacities as well as a new way

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 15

of planning and implementing public policies. Equipping missions with sufficient human, organiza-
tional and financial resources, together with an appropriate institutional design, is a prerequisite
for successful missions. Furthermore, we find that in order to ensure high-level political support for
the mission-oriented approach, governance structures need to reflect the considerable coordina-
tion requirements of the mission-oriented approach, especially in regard to cross-ministerial coop-
eration. This may imply to move mission responsibility to higher political levels or, alternatively, to
delegate the responsibility for missions to one or several agencies. Further, much more emphasis
needs to be directed at inclusive processes that strengthen the ownership of relevant stakeholders
in the different phases of a mission in o rder to mobilize resources from both private and public
actors.
In general, MOIP actively need to face public debates and engage in dialogue with the wider public.
This makes it also necessary for mission owners and involved actors to actively communicate the
aims, the instruments and the progress of the missions. Mobilizing for missions requires a convinc-
ing narrative, clearly formulated goals and an aligned instrument mix. Therefore, we consider the
establishment of sound strategic processes along the different phases of missions as a key prereq-
uisite for bringing missions into realization. Attempts to simply re-label existing approaches without
effectively altering the approach to policy-making will result in shallow missions that primarily exist
on paper and are unlikely to reap the promised benefits.
Missions create the most added value when they are able to bundle existing efforts and ensure a
close alignment of activities at different levels across different fields and mobilize diverse actors for
a clearly defined shared goal. Missions should strive for an integrated instrument mix of both ex-
isting and new policies, bringing together STI with sectoral policies – obviously a core challenge
that has been debated by academia as well as policy practitioners ever since MOIP have been es-
tablished: missions should not be approached from finding niches aside established policies, but
instead aim for a more integrated approach. Particularly challenging but also rewarding are efforts
to generate synergies between missions by means of a dedicated meta-governance of missions. A
more coherent pooling of missions along thematic focal points and the definition of clear and over-
arching goals would open up the possibility of exploiting synergies between individual missions in
a more targeted manner than has been the case to date.
Finally, to improve the adaptability and flexibility of MOIP, institutional arrangements and organi-
zational cultures should become a major focus. At an institutional level, this implies to create gov-
ernance structures and a learning culture that is capable of absorbing the feedback from mission
implementation and individual programs and feed them back into the advancement of a mission,
such as, for example, the question how to draw lessons from experimental policies, such as real
laboratories. Useful for this purpose could be interdisciplinary advisory boards for each mission,
composed of independent experts and stakeholders. At a more cognitive level, the shift towards
MOIP requires a reflexive approach that also affects the administrative, organizational and political
culture. The ability to learn from experiences, whether pleasant or not, strongly builds on a culture
accepting risk and possible failure. An honest and transparent stock-taking of what is working and
what not is extremely useful for the further development of the mission. In policy contexts charac-
terized by complexity and uncertainty, high levels of adaptability and strategic reflexivity are of key
importance.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 16

5 Literature
BMBF (2006): Die Hightech-Strategie für Deutschland. Bonn, Berlin.
BMBF (2010): Ideen. Innovation. Wachstum. Hightech-Strategie 2020 für Deutschland. Bonn, Ber-
lin: Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) – Referat Innovationspolitische
Querschnittsfragen, Rahmenbedingungen.
BMBF (2014): Die neue Hightech-Strategie. Innovationen für Deutschland. Berlin: Bundesministeri-
um für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) – Referat Grundsatzfragen der Innovationspolitik.
BMBF (2018): Research and innovation that benefit the people. The High-Tech Strategy 2025. Ber-
lin.
BMBF (2022): Zukunftsstrategie Forschung und Innovation. Available at
https://www.bmbf.de/bmbf/de/forschung/zukunftsstrategie/zukunftsstrategie_node.html.
Braun, D. (2008): Organising the political coordination of knowledge and innovation policies. In:
Science and Public Policy, 35 (4), pp. 227–239.
Daimer, S.; Hufnagl, M.; Warnke, P. (2012): Challenge-oriented policy-making and innovation sys-
tems theory: reconsidering systemic instruments. In: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und
Innovationsforschung (Ed.): Innovation system revisited – Experiences from 40 years of
Fraunhofer ISI research. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, pp. 217–234.
Edler, J.; Salas Gironés, E. (2020): How do framing and ideas influence the design of missions? A
comparative analysis between Germany, the Netherlands, & the United Kingdom. EU-SPRI
virtual session on Shaping System Transitions – Insights from practice. 5th of June 2020.
Expertenkommission Forschung und Innovation (2021): Gutachten zu Forschung, Innovation und
technologischer Leistungsfähigkeit Deutschlands 2021. Berlin.
Fernández-i-Marín, X.; Knill, C.; Steinbach, Y. (2021): Studying Policy Design Quality in
Comparative Perspective. In: American Political Science Review, 115 (3), pp. 931–947.
Foray, D.; Mowery, D. C.; Nelson, R. R. (2012): Public R&D; and social challenges: What lessons
from mission R&D; programs? In: Research Policy, 41 (10), pp. 1697–1702.
Hightech Forum (2021): shaping the future together. Final report of the High-Tech Forum 2019-
2021. Unofficial translation. Berlin.
Hufnagl, M. (2010): Dimensionen von Policy-Instrumenten – eine Systematik am Beispiel Innovati-
onspolitik. Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag.
Janssen, M. J.; Torrens, J.; Wesseling, J.; Wanzenböck, I.; Patterson, J. (2020): Position paper. ‘Mis-
sion-oriented innovation policy observatory’. Utrecht: Copernicus Institute of Sustainable
De-velopment, Utrecht University.
Janssen, M. J.; Torrens, J.; Wesseling, J. H.; Wanzenböck, I. (2021): The promises and premises of
mission-oriented innovation policy – A reflection and ways forward. In: Science and Public
Poli-cy, (48), pp. 438–444.
Kattel, R.; Mazzucato, M. (2018): Mission-oriented innovation policy and dynamic capabilities in
the public sector. In: Industrial and Corporate Change, 27 (5), pp. 787–801.

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 17

Kuittinen, H.; Skov Kristensen, F.; Pelkonen, A.; Lehenkari, J.; Goetheer, A.; van der Zee, F.; Arrilucea,
E.; Unger, M.; Türk, A.; Polt, W.; Fisher, R.; Domini, A.; Chicot, J.; Terziev, N.; Vincze, M.;
Taranic, I.; Lykogianni, E.; Misojcic, M. (2018a): Mission-oriented research and innovation.
Assessing the impact of a mission-oriented research and innovation approach: Final report.
Luxembourg: European Commission – Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Kuittinen, H.; Unger, M.; Türk, A.; Polt, W.; Fisher, R.; Domini, A.; Goetheer, A.; Lehenkari, J.; Pelko-
nen, A.; Arrilucea, E.; Skov Kristensen, F.; Chicot, J.; van der Zee, F. (2018b): Mission-oriented
research and innovation. Inventory and characterisation of initiatives: Final report.
Luxembourg: European Commission.
Larrue, P. (2021): The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies. A new
systemic policy approach to address societal challenges. Paris: OECD.
Lindner, R. (2012): Cross-sectoral coordination of STI-policies: governance principles to bridge
policy-fragmentation. In: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung (Ed.):
Innovations Systems Revisited – Experiences from 40 years of Fraunhofer ISI research.
Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag, pp. 275–289.
Lindner, R.; Daimer, S.; Beckert, B.; Heyen, N.; Köhler, J. H.; Teufel, B.; Warnke, P.; Wydra, S. (2016):
Addressing directionality. Orientation failure and the systems of innovation heuristic :
towards reflexive governance. Karlsruhe.
Lindner, R.; Edler, J.; Hufnagl, M.; Kimpeler, S.; Kroll, H.; Roth, F.; Wittmann, F.; Yorulmaz, M. (2021):
Mission-oriented innovation policy. From ambition to successful implementation. Karlsruhe:
Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI.
Mazzucato, M. (2018a): Mission-oriented innovation policies: Challenges and opportunities. In:
Industrial and Corporate Change, 27 (5), pp. 803–815.
Mazzucato, M. (2018b): Mission-Oriented Research & Innovation in the European Union. A prob-
lem-solving approach to fuel innovation-led growth. Brussels: European Commission –
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
NDK (2019): Gemeinsame Erklärung. Nationale Dekade gegen Krebs 2019 - 2029. Nationale De-
kade gegen Krebs – Eine Initiative vom Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung.
OECD; Danish Design Center (2022): Mission-oriented innovation needs assessment survey. High-
lights & insights on mission work.
Polt, W.; Weber, M.; Biegelbauer, P.; Unger, M. (2019): Matching type of mission and governance
in mission-oriented R&I policy: conceptual improvement and guidance for policy. Eu-SPRI
Conference. Rome, 06.06.2020. Available at
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334277744_Matching_type_of_mission_and_gove
rnance_in_mission-oriented_RI_policy, accessed 25.09.2019.
Roth, F.; Lindner, R.; Hufnagl, M.; Wittmann, F.; Yorulmaz, M. (2021): The future of mission-
oriented policies. Final report of the Scientific Support Action to the German High-Tech
Strategy 2025 – volume 1. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und
Innovationsforschung ISI.
Weber, M.; Polt, M. (2014): Assessing mission-orientated R&D programs: combining foresight and
evaluation. In: Fteval – Journal for Research and Technology Policy Evaluation, (39), pp. 5–
10.
Weber, M.; Rohracher, H. (2012): Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies for
transformative change. In: Research Policy, 41 (6), pp. 1037–1047.

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
Fraunhofer ISI Discussion Papers Innovation Systems and Policy Analysis No. 75
Fraunhofer ISI | 18

Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Lindner, R.; Roth, F.; Edler, J. (2021a): Governing varieties of mission-
oriented innovation policies: A new typology. In: Science and Public Policy, 48 (5), pp. 727–
738.
Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Roth, F.; Yorulmaz, M.; Lindner, R. (2021b): From mission definition to
implementation: Conceptualizing mission-oriented policies as a multi-stage translation
process. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovationsforschung ISI.
Wittmann, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Roth, F.; Yorulmaz, M.; Lindner, R. (2021c): Second Mission Analysis
Report of the Scientific Support Action to the German High-Tech Strategy 2025: Zooming
in: Translating missions into policy instruments. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System-
und Innovationsforschung ISI.
Wittmann, F.; Roth, F.; Hufnagl, M. (2020): First Mission Analysis Report of the Scientific Support
Action to the German High-Tech Strategy 2025. Setting the stage: Positioning the missions
in the socio-technical system. Karlsruhe: Fraunhofer Institut für System- und Innovations-
forschung ISI.
Wittmann, F.; Roth, F.; Hufnagl, M.; Lindner, R.; Yorulmaz, M. (2022): Towards a framework for im-
pact assessment for mission-oriented innovation policies. A formative toolbox approach. In:
fteval Journal for Research and Technology Policy Evaluation, 53, 31–42.
