
===== PDF_PAGE 1 =====
OECD Science, Technology
and/uni00A0Innovation Outlook 2023
ENABLING TRANSITIONS IN/uni00A0TIMES OF/uni00A0DISRUPTION
OECD Science, Technology and/uni00A0Innovation Outlook 2023 ENABLING TRANSITIONS IN/uni00A0TIMES OF/uni00A0DISRUPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 2 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 3 =====
OECD Science, Technology
and Innovation
 Outlook
2023
ENABLING TRANSITIONS IN TIMES OF DISRUPTION

===== PDF_PAGE 4 =====
This report was approved and declassified by the OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP) on 6
March 2
023 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.
The Foreword and Executive Summary were prepared by the OECD Secretariat, and the opinions expressed and
arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of the Member countries of the OECD.
This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The use of
such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in
the West Bank under the terms of international law.
Note by the Republic of Türkiye
The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part of the Island. There is no single
authority representing both Turkish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island. Türkiye recognises the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution is found within the context of the United Nations, Türkiye
shall preserve its position concerning the “Cyprus issue”.
Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union
The Republic of Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Türkiye. The
information in this document relates to the area under the effective control of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
Please cite this publication as:
OECD (2
023), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023: Enabling Transitions in Times of Disruption, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0b55736e-en.
ISBN 978-
92-64-47187-0 (print)
ISBN 978-92-64-42238-4 (pdf)
ISBN 978-92-64-72005-3 (HTML)
ISBN 978-92-64-57850-0 (epub)
OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook
ISSN 2518-6272 (print)
ISSN 2518-6167 (online)
Photo credits: Cover design by Sylvain Fraccola (Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation).
Corrigenda to publications may be found on line at:
www.oecd.org/about/publishing/corrigenda.htm.
© OECD
 2023
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at https://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

===== PDF_PAGE 5 =====
 3
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Foreword
The OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023 is the latest in a series that reviews key
trends in science, technology, and innovation (STI) policy in OECD countries and several major partner
economies. This edition focuses on longstanding trends – including climate change and growing
geopolitical tensions – and recent disruptions, notably the COVID-19 pandemic, that have highlighted risk,
uncertainty and resilience as conditions and concerns for STI policy. Taken together, these have
contributed to a growing “securitisation” of STI policy.
As the pandemic has shown, STI is essential to building capacity for resiliency and adaptation to shocks.
However, it can only perform this role effectively if it is well -prepared to respond to known risks and
unknown uncertainties. Good preparation requires long -term investments in research and development ,
skills and infrastructures, but this alone is insufficient. It also needs strong relationships in “normal times”
among those who should mobilise rapidly to deal with crisis situations, as well as a strong “strategic
intelligence” capacity to identify, monitor and evaluate emerging risks and responses.
Ambitions to mobilise research and innovation systems to absorb, respond to, and recover from crises and
societal challenges as they emerge represents a distinct break from the status quo. Novel and experimental
configurations of actors, institutions, and practices are needed to improve the resilience of STI systems
and the relevance of outputs to emerging crises, challenges, and the everyday lives of citizens. This is
particularly so for the climate emergency, which requires nothing short of a total transformation of
sociotechnical systems in areas such as energy, agrifood and mobility. STI systems have essential roles
in these transformations, but governments must b e more ambitious and act with greater urgency in their
STI policies. They need to design policy portfolios that enable transformative innovation and new markets
to emerge, challenge existing fossil -based systems, and create windows of opportunity for low -carbon
technologies to break through. This calls for larger investments but also greater directionality in research
and innovation, for example, through mission-oriented innovation policies, to help direct and compress the
innovation cycle for low-carbon technologies.
International co -operation will also be essential, but rising geopolitical tensions, including strategic
competition in key emerging technologies, could make this difficult. Growing policy efforts to reduce
technology dependencies could disrup t integrated global value chains and the deep and extensive
international science linkages that have built up over the last 30 years. Coupled with a growing emphasis
on “shared values” in technology development and research, these developments could lead t o a
“decoupling” of STI activities at a time when global challenges, notably climate change, require global
solutions underpinned by international STI co-operation. A major test for multilateralism will be to reconcile
growing strategic competition with the need to address global challenges like climate change.
The six chapters in this edition of the STI Outlook explore these and other key trends and issues, including
strategic competition and the governance of emerging technologies, mission -oriented innovation policies
for net-zero, and lessons from the scientific response to the COVID -19 pandemic. Taken togethe r, they
highlight the need for greater urgency, ambition, and preparedness in STI policy to better equip
governments with the tools and capacities to tackle global challenges and build resilience to future shocks.

===== PDF_PAGE 6 =====
4 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Acknowledgements
The 2023 edition of the O ECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook (STI Outlook) is prepared
under the aegis of the OECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP), with input from
its working parties. The STI Outlook 2023 is a collective effort, co-ordinated by the Science and Technology
Policy (STP) Division of the OECD Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation (DSTI). It is
produced under the guidance of Alessandra Colecchia, Head of STP Division. Michael Keenan served as
overall co-ordinator and Sylvain Fraccola as the administrative co-ordinator. Blandine Serve co-ordinated
statistical inputs.
Chapter 1, “STI policy in times of global crises ”, Chapter 2, “STI policy in times of strategic competition ”,
and Chapter 3, “STI policy for sustainability transitions”, were prepared by Michael Keenan (DSTI). They
are based on work carried out in the context of the CSTP’s crosscutting project, S&T Policy 2025: Enabling
transitions through science, technology and innovation . Chapter 4, “Mobilising science in times of crisis:
Lessons learned from COVID -19”, was prepared by Carthage Smith and Jessica Ambler (DSTI). The
chapter draws on recent work by the OECD Global Science Forum (GSF). Chapter 5, “Reaching Net zero:
Do mission -oriented policies deliver on their many promises? ”, was prepared by Philippe Larrue, with
assistance from Bora Kim (DSTI). It draws on CSTP work on mission-oriented innovation policies for net-
zero. Chapter 6, “Emerging technology governance: Towards an anticipatory framework ”, was prepared
by David Winickoff, Laura Kreiling and Douglas Robinson (DSTI). It is based on recent work carried out by
the Working Party on Biotechnology, Nanotechnology and Converging Technologies (BNCT) on
anticipatory technology governance.
All chapters of the 202 3 STI Outlook were reviewed by Alessandra Colecchia, Hanna-Mari Kilpelainen,
Jens Lundsgaard and Andrew Wyckoff of the DSTI. Chapter 2 was also reviewed by Kerri -Ann Jones,
OECD Deputy Secretary General, Marion Jansen, Director of OECD Trade and Agriculture Directorate,
Isabell Koske, Director of Country Studies Branch in the OECD Economics Department, and Tamas Hajba
(OECD Glob al Relations and Co -operation Directorate). The team thanks them for their valuable
comments and guidance. Thanks are likewise due to those CSTP delegates who provided comments on
chapter drafts and to participants in a CSTP high -level debate on 25 -26 November 2022 where the STI
Outlook’s main findings were discussed. The overall publication owes much to Sylvain Fraccola who
designed the infographics and oversaw all aspects of the publica tion process, and Blandine Serve for her
statistical support . Thanks a re also due to Silvia Appelt, Mario Cervantes, Agnès Cimper,
Antoine Dechezlepretre, Hélène Dernis, Fernando Galindo Rueda, Antton Haramboure,
Guillaume Kpodar, Guy Lalanne, Kuniko Matsumoto, Laurent Moussiegt, Alistair Nolan, Alan Paic,
James Philp, Lea Samak, Brigitte Van Beuzekom, Fabien Verger and Norihiko Yamano (DSTI) and
Suzy Leprince (IEA) for their helpful advice and statistical inputs. Andrés Barreneche and Laura Garcia
(DSTI) also contributed with inputs from the EC -OECD STIP Compass. The authors are grateful to
Beatrice Jeffries (DSTI) for her secretarial assistance and to Sebastian Ordelheide (DSTI) for his
communications support. Special thanks are given to Romy de Courtay for her editorial contributions and
bibliographic research.

===== PDF_PAGE 7 =====
 5
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Table of contents
Foreword 3
Acknowledgements 4
Abbreviations and acronyms 10
Executive summary 12
1 Science, technology and innovation policy in times of global crises 15
Introduction 17
STI and the COVID-19 crisis 17
Impact of COVID-19 on R&D expenditures 18
STI policy responses to COVID-19 20
Translating policy initiatives into research funding 22
Translating research into COVID-19 knowledge and vaccines 23
Outlook on COVID-19 and STI 26
STI and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine 28
Impacts on STI activities in Ukraine 28
International support for Ukrainian STI 31
A growing “securitisation” of STI policy? 32
Defence R&D spending 32
Biosecurity 34
Research security 35
References 37
Notes 41
2 Science, technology and innovation policy in times of strategic competition 43
Introduction 45
Strategic autonomy in research and innovation 46
Three types of policy intervention for strengthening strategic autonomy 47
How do China, the European Union and the United States compare? Some selected headline
indicators 48
Protection: Restricting knowledge flows and reducing risks from interdependency 51
Getting a measure of STI interdependency 52
Reconfiguring interdependencies? 55
Promotion: Enhancing industrial performance through STI investments 57
China’s “indigenous innovation” drive 57
The European Union’s “open strategic autonomy” agenda 60
United States: A “modern American industrial strategy” 61

===== PDF_PAGE 8 =====
6 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Strengthening international STI alliances 63
China’s Belt and Road Initiative and standardisation push 63
New alliances involving the European Union and the United States 65
Strengthening strategic autonomy in action: Semiconductors and critical minerals 66
Semiconductors 66
Critical minerals 68
Outlook 72
References 74
Notes 84
3 Science, technology and Innovation Policy for Sustainability Transitions 87
Introduction 89
Towards a more directive and multilevel policy approach 89
The pace of low-carbon innovation needs to accelerate 89
The sustainability challenge calls for greater directionality in policy making 90
Promoting sustainability transitions in STI policy sub-domains 95
STI funding and finance for sustainability transitions 96
Enabling technologies for sustainability transitions 102
Research and technical infrastructures 107
Co-operation and partnerships within innovation ecosystems 107
Cross-government co-ordination for transitions 108
Framework conditions for STI-enabled sustainability transitions 109
Societal engagement and just transitions 111
Strategic intelligence for sustainability transitions 111
International co-operation 113
Skills and capabilities 114
Outlook 115
References 117
Notes 121
4 Mobilising science in times of crisis: Lessons learned from COVID-19 125
Introduction 127
Policy for science 129
Open science and data 129
Research infrastructures 132
Partnerships: Transdisciplinary and multi-lateral collaboration 135
Science for policy (and decision-making) 138
Setting and implementing the research agenda 138
Science advice 141
Public communication and engagement 144
Looking forward: Maintaining the best, improving the rest 147
References 148
Notes 153
5 Reaching Net zero: Do mission-oriented policies deliver on their many promises? 159
Introduction 161
Current STI policy and governance frameworks are unfit to help deliver sustainability agendas 161
A wealth of “mission-oriented” systemic policy experimentations 162
Can MOIPs help countries implement the sociotechnical changes needed to transition
towards net-zero? 164
What are the outputs of net-zero missions? 167
Develop collective and strategic agendas to address societal challenges 168

===== PDF_PAGE 9 =====
 7
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Align and monitor various actors’ plans 171
Delivery and management of a portfolio of activities 172
What are the outcomes of MOIPs? 174
Broader scope and level of ambitions in missions 175
Greater resources and higher engagement in net-zero missions 176
More systemic innovation in net-zero missions 179
Conclusions 183
The MOIP “STI-only trap” 184
The MOIP “orientation trap” 185
Learning by mission orientation 185
References 187
Notes 190
6 Emerging technology governance: Towards an anticipatory framework 193
Introduction 195
An anticipatory policy framework for emerging technology governance 196
Shared values: The foundation of emerging technology governance 197
Design criteria for emerging technology governance 198
Tools: Concrete means for action 198
The importance of international co-operation 198
Tailor to the case 199
Anticipation: Building strategic intelligence through technology assessment 199
Rationales 199
Trends reshaping needs for TA-based strategic intelligence 201
Challenges and policy considerations 202
Inclusion and alignment: Engaging stakeholders and society upstream 203
Rationales: The need for upstream stakeholder engagement in innovation 204
Trends in upstream societal engagement 204
Upstream societal engagement: Three modes and examples 205
Challenges and policy considerations 208
Adaptivity: Co-developing principles, standards, guidelines, and codes of practice 209
Rationale 210
Trends and examples 210
“By-design” approaches 213
Challenges and policy considerations 213
Towards international co-operation on anticipatory governance 214
International co-operation on TA and strategic intelligence 214
International stakeholder and public engagement 215
International co-operation on principles, standards, guidelines, and codes of practice 215
Conclusion 215
References 216
Notes 224

Figures
Figure 1.1. Growth in gross domestic expenditure on R&D, between 2019-20 and 2020-21 18
Figure 1.2. R&D intensity: Gross domestic expenditure on R&D as a percentage of GDP 19
Figure 1.3. Industry R&D trends show variable growth by sector 20
Figure 1.4. Top 12 policy instruments used in STI policy initiatives targeting COVID-19 21
Figure 1.5. Shifts in existing STI policies in response to COVID-19 21
Figure 1.6. COVID-19 funded research projects mapped against WHO “research priorities” 22
Figure 1.7. COVID-19 vaccine candidates, by technology platform and clinical trial phase 23
Figure 1.8. Trends in registered COVID-19 vaccine studies, by clinical trial phases 24

===== PDF_PAGE 10 =====
8 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.9. Registered COVID-19 vaccine and drug studies by economy, as of 6 February 2023 25
Figure 1.10. Domestic R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP (Ukraine, Russia, EU27 and OECD) 29
Figure 1.11. Quantity and citation impact of scientific production in Ukraine, 2006-20 29
Figure 1.12. Ukraine’s top scientific collaboration partners, 2010, 2015 and 2020 30
Figure 1.13. Trends in total and defence government R&D budgets 1991-2021 33
Figure 1.14. R&D budgets for defence in selected countries 33
Figure 2.1. Three types of policy intervention to strengthen technological strategic autonomy 47
Figure 2.2. Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD), selected economies, 2000-21 48
Figure 2.3. R&D expenditures by sector and total full-time employed (FTE) researchers 49
Figure 2.4. Trends in volume and citation impact of scientific publications, selected economies 50
Figure 2.5. Distribution of IP5 patent families for selected countries and the rest of the world 51
Figure 2.6. Bilateral collaboration intensity trends in scientific publications, 1996-2021 52
Figure 2.7. Top 15 fields of collaboration between the United States and China 53
Figure 2.8. Foreign-born origin studying in the US tertiary education system 54
Figure 2.9. Net flows of scientific authors, top publishing countries, 2015 and 2021 54
Figure 2.10. Flows of intermediate products in high and medium-high R&D-intensive economic activities,
selected economies 55
Figure 2.11. Mineral intensity of selected clean and fossil energy technologies 69
Figure 2.12. Current production of many energy-transition minerals is more geographically concentrated than
for oil or natural gas 70
Figure 3.1. Global CO2 emissions changes by technology maturity category in the IEA’s NZE 90
Figure 3.2. List of policy instruments commonly used in STI policy 91
Figure 3.3. Top 5 STI policy instruments reported in “STI policies for net-zero” portal 92
Figure 3.4. Promoting innovations to take advantage of windows of opportunity 93
Figure 3.5. Key challenges for STI policy in promoting sustainability transitions 95
Figure 3.6. Government R&D budget trends, 2016-21 96
Figure 3.7. Key players in the global landscape 97
Figure 3.8. Low-carbon public RD&D expenditures in GDP across IEA member countries, 1974-2021 97
Figure 3.9. Patent filings and trademark registrations in climate-change mitigation and adaptation (CCMA)
technologies 100
Figure 3.10. Direct government funding and government tax support for business R&D 101
Figure 3.11. Continuing shift in government policy support mix for business R&D 101
Figure 3.12. Public RD&D budgets on renewable energy and other low-carbon technologies 103
Figure 3.13. Greenhouse gas emissions by sector, 2019 108
Figure 3.14. Share of respondents who support climate-change policies (somewhat to strongly) 110
Figure 4.1. Policy for science and science for policy 128
Figure 4.2. Open access of COVID-19, diabetes and dementia publications, 2020 and 2022 130
Figure 4.3. The Covid-19 research data life cycle and policy levers 131
Figure 4.4. Setting global research priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic 138
Figure 4.5. COVID-19 evidence for health decision and policy making 139
Figure 5.1. Gap between GHG emissions and 2030 national targets for selected countries, 1990-2020, and
linear projections 2021-30 161
Figure 5.2. Map of MOIPs and their net-zero missions 163
Figure 5.3. MOIPs as an integrated framework to steer, co-ordinate and implement collective action toward
net-zero 164
Figure 5.4. The theory of change of a net-zero mission: From MOIP design principles to net-zero
achievements 166
Figure 5.5. Different types of public interventions to support the transition towards a net-zero society 173
Figure 5.6. Integration of the demand dimension in net-zero missions at different stages of the mission
lifecycle 180
Figure 5.7. Breakdown of net-zero MOIP initiatives and missions by scope of integration 182
Figure 6.1. Elements of a framework for emerging technology governance 197
Figure 6.2. GAO: Assessment of vaccine development technologies 202
Figure 6.3. Each engagement mode comes with a set of engagement techniques 205

Boxes
Box 1.1. What sorts of STI policies did governments use to target COVID-19 and mitigate its effects? 20
Box 1.2. Ukraine: A science system in transition, with core strengths 29

===== PDF_PAGE 11 =====
 9
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 1.3. Preventive measures to counter risks from synthetic biology 34
Box 1.4. Measures supporting research security and integrity 35
Box 2.1. Selected Chinese industrial policy initiatives 58
Box 2.2. Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEIs) 60
Box 2.3. Recent “chips acts” in the United States and the European Union 67
Box 2.4. Recent EU and US initiatives to enhance supply-chain diversity in critical minerals 71
Box 3.1. “STI policies for net-zero” portal 92
Box 3.2. Enabling positive tipping points for sustainability transitions 94
Box 3.3. Will post-COVID-19 recovery packages accelerate low-carbon innovation? 98
Box 3.4. The big push for hydrogen 103
Box 3.5. Digitalisation and the green transition 105
Box 3.6. Carbon management for net-zero: Bioeconomy and beyond 105
Box 3.7. OECD Global Forum on Technology 106
Box 5.1. A theory of change of net-zero missions 165
Box 6.1. Considerations for Robust Technology Assessment 203
Box 6.2. Policy considerations for conducting effective societal engagement 209
Box 6.3. Guidelines on the ethics of stem cell research as a self-regulatory approach 211
Box 6.4. International Gene Synthesis Consortium 212
Box 6.5. Policy considerations for co-developing principles, guidelines, standards, and codes 213

Look for the12 at the bottom of the tables or graphs in
this book. To download the matching Excel® spreadsheet, just type
the link into your Internetbrowser or click on the link from the digital
version.
This book has...
A service that delivers Excel® files from the printedpage!
Follow OECD Publications on:
https://twitter.com/OECD
https://www.facebook.com/theOECD
https://www.linkedin.com/company/organisation-eco-co operation-
development-organisat ion-cooperation-developpement-eco/
https://www.youtube.com/user/OECDiLibrary
https://www.oecd.org/newsletters/

===== PDF_PAGE 12 =====
10 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Abbreviations and acronyms
AI Artificial intelligence
BERD Business Enterprise R-D Expenditure
CCS Carbon Capture and Storage
CCU Carbon Capture and Utilisation
CERN European Organization for Nuclear Research
COP Conference of the Parties
CPC Cooperative Patent Classification
DAC Direct air capture
DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
EPO European Patent Office
EU European Union
EUIPO European Union Intellectual Property Office
EV Electric Vehicles
FAIR Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Re-useable
GDP Gross domestic product
GERD Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and Development
GHG Greenhouse gas
GOVERD Government Intramural Expenditure on R&D
GTARD Government Tax Relief for R&D Expenditures
HERD Higher Education Expenditure on R&D
HPC High-performance computing
IEA International Energy Agency
IoT Internet of Things
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
JPO Japan Patent Office
MOIP Mission-Oriented Innovation Policies
MSTI Main Science and Technology Indicators
MTIP Mission-driven Top Sector and Innovation Policy
NDC Nationally determined contributions
NGO Non-governmental organisation

===== PDF_PAGE 13 =====
 11
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

NZE Net Zero Emissions
PET Privacy-enhancing technologies
PHSM Public health and social measure
PPP Public-private partnerships
R&D Research and development
RD&D Research, development and demonstration
RI Research infrastructures
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
SSH Social sciences and humanities
STI Science, Technology and Innovation
STIP Science, Technology and Innovation Policy
TA Technology assessment
TDR Transdisciplinary research
TI Technical infrastructures
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USPTO United States Patent and Trademark Office
WHO World Health Organization
WTO World Trade Organization

===== PDF_PAGE 14 =====
12 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Executive summary
Enabling transitions in times of disruption
Longstanding trends and recent disruptions have created a new operating environment for STI policy.
Climate change and its impacts are increasingly driving STI agendas, as is the fast pace of change implied
by the digital transformation, in what is often termed the “twin transitions”. At the same time, the two most
salient disruptions of the last couple of years – the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine – have had far-reaching, cascading effects, including on STI.
Global crises are contributing to a growing “securitisation” of STI policy agendas
Climate change, growing geopolitical tensions and the COVID -19 pandemic have highlighted risk,
uncertainty and resilience as conditions and concerns for STI policy. Taken toget her, these have
contributed to a growing “securitisation” of STI policy. As the pandemic has shown, STI is essential to
building capacity for resiliency and adaptation to shocks. However, it can only perform this role effectively
if it is well -prepared to respond to known risks and unknown uncertainties. International scientific co-
ordination and co-operation structures and mechanisms were severely tested by the pandemic and showed their
limitations. Many countries and populations could not access the benefits of science and technology, such as
vaccines and therapeutics. Good preparation requires long-term investments in research and development,
skills and infrastructures, but this alone is insufficient. It also needs strong relationships in “normal times”
among those who should mobilise rapidly to deal with crisis situations, as well as a strong “strategic
intelligence” capacity to identify, monitor and evaluate emerging risks and responses. It is in the mutual
interest of all countries to ensure these rela tionships and capacities are globally distributed to enable an
inclusive scientific and technological response to future crises.
Geopolitical tensions are contributing to strategic competition in emerging technologies
The growing ascendancy of China in fr ontier technologies raises various concerns for liberal market
economies, including rising competition in critical technologies that are expected to underpin future
economic competitiveness and national security ; and growing vulnerability from technology s upply-chain
interdependencies, for example, in semiconductors and critical minerals . These concerns translate into a
growing convergence between economic and security policy agendas and intensifying global technology-
based competition. Governments are putt ing in place measures to (i) reduce STI interdependency risks
and restrict international technology flows; (ii) enhance industrial performance through STI investments;
and (iii) strengthen international STI alliances among like -minded economies. These measures could
disrupt integrated global value chains and the deep and extensive international science linkages that have
built up over the last 30 years. Coupled with a growing emphasis on “shared values” in technology
development and research, they could lead to a “decoupling” of STI activities at a time when global
challenges require global solutions underpinned by international STI co -operation. A major test for
multilateralism will be to reconcile growing strategic competition with the need to address global challenges
like climate change.

===== PDF_PAGE 15 =====
 13
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

STI systems are crucial for enabling sustainability transitions
The climate emergency requires nothing short of a total transformation of sociotechnical systems in areas such as
energy, agrifood and mobility. STI systems have essential roles in these transformations, but governments must
be more ambitious and act with greater urgency in their STI policies to support them. They need to design policy
portfolios that enable transformative innovation and new markets to emerge, challenge existing fossil-based
systems, and create windows of opportunity for low-carbon technologies to break through. Larger investments
and greater directionality in research and innovation activities are needed, for example, by using mission-oriented
innovation policies, to help direct and compress the innovation cycle for low-carbon technologies. These should
coincide with a reappraisal of STI systems and their supporting STI policies to ensure they are “fit-for-purpose” to
contribute to sustainability transitions. Systems thinking can help identify and understand critical linkages,
synergies and trade-offs and empower policy makers to better recognise policy constraints and identify leverage
points where they could act to unblock transition barriers.
The global STI response to COVID-19 provides important lessons for sustainability transitions
Science played an essential role in generating the knowledge and technologies needed to respond to the COVID-
19 crisis. The pandemic offers lessons that can position science to respond more effectively to future crises. For
instance, much can be learned from successful co-operation between various actors during the pandemic, but
reinforcing these relationships over the longer term may require significant change to academic culture, structures,
incentives and rewards. Many of the required changes – including in research performance assessment, public
engagement, and transdisciplinary research – are already underway but have not yet been adopted at the
necessary scale and speed because of embedded inertia in science systems. More radical change is necessary
to spur science to engage with other societal stakeholders to produce the broader range of outputs and solutions
that are urgently required to deal with complex global challenges and crises.
Mission-oriented innovation policies could help achieve net-zero targets
Mission-oriented innovation policies are increasingly popular as a policy response to meeting net-zero targets.
They have clear objectives and measurable targets, promote broader co-ordination of policy plans across
administrative silos, and better integrate various support instruments across the different stages of the innovation
chain. These policies remain unproven, however, and early indications suggest they lack sufficient scale and reach
to non-STI policy domains to have wide-ranging impact. The challenge remains to move these initiatives from
effective coordination platforms to integrated policy frameworks that mobilise and align a wide range of actors.
Overcoming many of the barriers – including administrative and legal rules, accounting structures and governance
models – requires changes that are far beyond the reach of STI authorities alone and will need significant political
support.
Good technology governance can encourage the best from technology
Emerging technologies can be pivotal for much needed transformations and responses to crises, but rapid
technological change can carry negative consequences and risks for individuals, societies and the environment
including social disruption, inequality, and dangers to security and human rights. The democratic community is
increasingly asserting that “shared values” of democracy, human rights, sustainability, openness, responsibility,
security and resilience should be embedded in technology, but questions r emain on how this should be
accomplished, especially when technology trajectories are set by developments in firms and public labs that are
widely distributed across the globe in a variety of governance contexts. Using “upstream” design principles and
tools can help balance the need to drive the development of technologies and to scale them up while helping to
realise just transitions and values-based technology.

===== PDF_PAGE 16 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 17 =====
 15
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Longstanding trends and recent disruptions have created a new operating
environment for STI policy. Climate change, growing geopolitical tensions
and the COVID-19 pandemic have highlighted risk, uncertainty and
resilience as conditions and concerns for STI policy. As the pandemic has
shown, STI is essential to building capacity for resiliency and adaptation to
shocks. However, it can only perform this role effectively if it is well-
prepared to respond to known risks and unknown uncertainties. Good
preparation requires long-term investments in research and development,
skills and infrastructures, but this alone is insufficient. It also needs strong
relationships in “normal times” among those who should mobilise rapidly to
deal with crisis situations, as well as a strong “strategic intelligence”
capacity to identify, monitor and evaluate emerging risks and responses.
It is in the mutual interest of all countries to ensure these relationships and
capacities are globally distributed to enable an inclusive scientific and
technological response to future crises.

1 Science, technology and innovation
policy in times of global crises

===== PDF_PAGE 18 =====
16 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Key messages
 Multiple crises are triggering turbulence, instability and insecurity in contemporary societies,
with impacts on economies, the environment, politics, and global affairs. The two most salient
disruptions of the last couple of years – the COVID -19 pandemic and Russia’s war of
aggression against Ukraine – have had far -reaching and cascading effects, including on
science, technology and innovation (STI).
 Assessment of the pandemic response provides key and actionable insights into what will likely
be required of STI systems to respond more effectively to future crises. Looking back on how
the pandemic has unfolded provides an opportunity to identify and resolve structural challenges
to the effective operation of STI systems and support them in fostering the resilience needed to
prepare for, respond and recover from, future crises and complex societal challenges.
 Research and innovation capabilities make economies and societies more resilient, but t hey
require long-term investments in R&D, skills and infrastructures. Strong relationships in “normal
times” between those who should mobilise rapidly to deal with crisis situations should be
nurtured. Several OECD countries have announced substantial STI investments to improve
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. But these should be complemented by
greater investment in research infrastructure as well as production capacities in low - and
middle-income countries to enhance global preparedness and response.
 Geopolitical tensions led to vaccine competition between countries, creating a patchwork of
vaccine approvals around the world. The global architecture to provide equitable access to
vaccines has not met expectations, owing (among other factors) to insufficient funding,
wealthier-country hoarding and logistical challenges. Vaccine “nationalism” and “diplomacy”
raise concerns about strategic competition in other technology areas, as well as the prospects
of future STI co-operation on global challenges such as climate change.
 More broadly, the pandemic and war in Ukraine have brought risk, uncertainty and resilience to
the fore as conditions and concerns for STI policy. They have contributed to a growing
“securitisation” of STI policies, whose defin ition is broadly defined to cover a range of issues
beyond traditional defence concerns. These include biosecurity, for example, where promising
research in fields like synthetic biology carry inherent risks.
 The concept of research security has also stron gly emerged in recent years, to counter
unauthorised information transfer and foreign interference in public research. OECD
governments have put in place measures to improve research security, emphasising the values,
norms and principles that constitute good scientific practice.
 Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has had few direct impacts on STI activities in
OECD countries. Nevertheless, OECD countries have levied unprecedented science
“sanctions” on Russia and continue to support Ukrainian scien tists through a range of policy
measures. Ukraine has longstanding “brain drain” challenges, which the war could exacerbate.
OECD countries should aim to promote genuine brain circulation and the establishment of
sustainable and productive long-term partnerships with Ukrainian scientific institutions.
 The pandemic demonstrates the implausibility of anticipating and addressing all the
cascading implications of ongoing and future crises as they emerge and hence the
importance of focusing on improving systemic resilience. To manage crises and contribute
to society’s resiliency, policy needs to be more anticipatory, systemic, inclusive and
innovative. Good preparation also calls for a strong “strategic intelligence” capacity to
identify, monitor and evaluate eme rging risks and responses. Such policy qualities also
depend on government capacities that will take time and investment to develop.

===== PDF_PAGE 19 =====
 17
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Introduction
Longstanding trends and recent disruptions have created a new operating environment for STI policy.
Climate change and its impacts, along with the fast pace of change implied by the digital transformation,
are driving STI agendas in what is often termed the “twin transition”. At the same time, the two most salient
disruptions of the last couple of years – the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine – have had far -reaching, cascading effects, including on STI. During the pandemic, STI played
prominent roles in understanding the virus and its transmission and designing appropriate
countermeasures, notably by developing highly effective vaccines over a very short period. The pandemic
has also impacted STI, for example, by introducing greater flexibility in R&D funding and boosting open
science. Beyond the impacts of advanced weaponry, the role of STI in the war in Ukraine is less prominent
or clear -cut. However, the war and ensuing energy crisis have highlighted the need to accelerate the
transition from fossil fuels to clean energy sources. Achieving this objective will depend on the rapid
deployment of existing or close -to-market green innovation solutions to improve energy security in the
short term, as well as boosting investments in R&D to underpin longer -term transitions to net -zero (see
Chapter 3).
The significant uncertainty arising fro m the war in Ukraine adds to the challenges already facing policy
makers owing to unexpectedly strong inflationary pressures and imbalances related to the pandemic. In
many economies, inflation in 2022 has been at its highest since the 1980s, while rising debt service
burdens are also likely to compound challenges for public finances. With recent indicators taking a turn for
the worse, the global economic outlook has darkened, with global growth projected to slow even further in
2023 (OECD, 2022[1]).
The chapter begins by discussing two recent disruptions – COVID-19 and Russia’s war against Ukraine –
and their impacts on STI. Both the pandemic and Russia’s aggression have required large -scale
government interventions to stave off economic crises. The pandemic resulted in the first recession where
R&D expenditures have not fallen, largely because of their significant roles in tackling the crisis. It is too
early to tell what impact Russia’s aggression will have on R&D exp enditures, but there is the possibility
their growth will falter in the event of a deep or protracted economic slowdown. The chapter then describes
how these disruptions, together with the climate crisis and anxieties related to technological change, have
brought risk, uncertainty and resilience to the fore as conditions and concerns for STI policy. They have
contributed to a growing “securitisation” 1 of STI policies, where economic competitiveness rationales for
policy intervention are now combined with ra tionales emphasising national security, sustainability
transitions and (to a much lesser extent) inclusion. The final section draws some lessons and presents a
brief outlook for STI policy in times of global crisis.
STI and the COVID-19 crisis
At the time of publication of the last edition of the STI Outlook (OECD, 2021[2]), the COVID-19 pandemic
was less than a year old, but the science and innovation community had already responded decisively and
at pace. Through mult ibillion-dollar public and private investments, the first vaccines had already been
approved and tens of thousands of scientific articles had been openly published, many reporting on
research performed by international teams. At the same time, COVID -19 restrictions were still largely in
force, with more to follow during 2021-22. These were having a range of negative impacts, both directly on
STI activities and indirectly through their wider social and economic effects, although these were difficult
to measure at the time. Two years on, it is possible to get a better sense of the pandemic’s effects on STI
activities and how STI responded. Chapter 4 provides an overview of how science was mobilised to
respond to the pandemic. This chapter focuses on selected k ey indicators of R&D expenditures and
vaccine developments.

===== PDF_PAGE 20 =====
18 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Impact of COVID-19 on R&D expenditures
OECD gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD) grew 2.1% between 2019 -20 (Figure 1.1). While this
was a sharp slowdown compared to previous years (when it was growing at around 5% annually), it was
nevertheless exceptional, marking the first time a global recession has not translated into falls in R&D
expenditures. This reflects how investments in R&D were an integral part of the response to the pandemic
(OECD, 2022 [3]). Growth in R&D in the OECD area in 2020 was primarily driven by the United States
(+6.4%), in contrast to declining R&D expenditures in Germany ( -4.9%)2 and Japan (-2.7%). Provisional
data for 2021 show that OECD growth rates bounced back to pre -pandemic levels, with OECD GERD
growing 4.5% between 2020-21. This reflects a recovery in R&D expenditures in many countries that had
experienced a decline in the previous year.
Figure 1.1. Growth in gross domestic expenditure on R&D, between 2019-20 and 2020-21
Percentage growth rate in constant price

Source: OECD R&D statistics, February 2023. See OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators, http://oe.cd/msti, for most up -to-date
indicators
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/fksr1m
Across the OECD, Israel (5.6%) and Korea (4.9%) continued to display the highest levels of R&D intensity
as a percentage of GDP (Figure 1.2). R&D intensity in the OECD area climbed from 2.5% in 2019 to 2.7%
of GDP in 2021. Over the same period, R&D intensity as a percentage of GDP increased in the
European Union (EU27) area from 2.1% to 2.2%, in the United States from 3.2% to 3.5%, and in the
People’s Republic of China (hereafter China) from 2.2% to 2.4%.
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
France Germany EU (27) Japan OECD Italy United States Korea China
2019-20 2020-21
%

===== PDF_PAGE 21 =====
 19
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.2. R&D intensity: Gross domestic expenditure on R&D as a percentage of GDP

Note: 2021 data corresponds to 2020 for Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Türkiye and United Kingdom. Data for the United Kingdom only available for
2018-20 and preliminary. Following a major data revision by the UK statistical agency conducted in late 2022 and effective only from 2018, back
series for previous years have been suppressed from the data available to OECD.
Source: OECD R&D statistics, February 2023. See OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators, http://oe.cd/msti, for most up -to-date
indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/indw0q
Since the private sector accounts for more than two-thirds of R&D expenditures in the OECD, a country’s
R&D intensity is heavily influenced by the R&D activities of its firms. The OECD Short -term Financial
Tracker of Business R&D (SwiFTBeRD) dashboard delivers the timeliest possib le insights on company -
specific and sectoral quarterly and annual R&D data reported by several of the world’s major
R&D investors.3 Analysis of R&D expense growth in 2021 confirms widespread improvement across the
board for most companies following the initial pandemic shock in 2020 (Figure 1.3). Software, computer &
electronic technology firms and (to a lesser extent) pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms continued to
drive R&D expense growth, while automotive and aerospace (along with other industries) were still lagging
in 2021. In the first half of 2022, year -on-year aggregate R&D expense growth in the software, computer
& electronic technology sector remained at around 10%, while it was almost flat in other sectors. Given
these trends, as Figure 1.3 shows, R&D expenses in the software, computer & electronic technology sector
were more than 50% higher in mid-2022 as compared to the start of 2018. In the automotive and aerospace
sector and other industries, by contrast, R&D expenses had yet to recover to their 2018 levels.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
%
2021 or latest year available 2019 2010 or closest year available

===== PDF_PAGE 22 =====
20 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.3. Industry R&D trends show variable growth by sector
Index 2018Q1 = 1, constant prices

Note: Reported values are deflated using the GDP price index of the OECD zone. Company reports of R&D expenses need not coincide wi th
R&D expenditures as covered in official R&D statistics compiled according to the Frascati Manual (OECD, 2015). In order to compile the
SwiFTBeRD data, the OECD implements a series of adjustments aimed at enhancing comparability, whenever the necessary informat ion is
available. Companies presenting their financial results in compliance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) capitalise part
of their development costs (under some criteria). In the data presented in SwiFTBeRD, capitalised development costs are added to reported
R&D expenses, while amortisation of capitalised development expenditures are conversely excluded, provided that the information is available
both in the annual and interim reports. In addition, when possible, expenses and impairment of purchased in -process R&D (as well as
restructuring R&D costs) are excluded in the SwiFTBeRD figures in order to align as much as possible with R&D conducted in the reference
period and deliver more meaningful indicators.
Source: OECD Short -term Financial Tracker of Business R&D (SwiFTBeRD) dashboard, Beta version, 7 December 2022, https://oecd-
main.shinyapps.io/swiftberd/ (accessed 8 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/uayc3b
STI policy responses to COVID-19
Governments launched hundreds of STI policy initiatives in the first year of the pandemic to develop
research and innovation solutions. In the first six months of the pandemic, national public research-funding
agencies and organisations announced they were providing more than USD 5 billion for public research -
funding schemes targeting COVID-19 (OECD, 2021[2]). Box 1.1 provides a breakdown of the types of policy
initiatives that were used.

0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
All sectors Pharma & biotech Software, computer & electronic
Automotive & aerospace Other industries
All sectors
Pharma & biotech
Automotive & aerospace
Other industries
Software, computer & electronic
Index 2018Q1 = 1, constant prices
Box 1.1. What sorts of STI policies did governments use to target COVID-19 and mitigate its
effects?
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) Compass “COVID -19 Watch tracker” 1 has
collected information on more than 900 STI policy initiatives launched between January 2020 and
June 2021. Analysis shows these covered a wide range of target groups using a mix of policy instruments
(Barreneche, 2021[4]), notably grant schemes targe ting public research, as well as business R&D and
innovation. “Soft” instruments, including public awareness campaigns, information services and
stakeholder consultation were also used extensively (Figure 1.4).

===== PDF_PAGE 23 =====
 21
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.4. Top 12 policy instruments used in STI policy initiatives targeting COVID-19
Number of policy instruments in the COVID-19 Watch portal of STIP Compass, by type of policy instrument

Source: EC-OECD STIP Compass, https://stip.oecd.org (accessed 7 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/6pu7em
More than 90% of STI policy initiatives in the COVID -19 Watch database were launched in 2020. 2
Following this spate of standalone emergency policy measures in the early phases of the pandemic,
governments shifted their response to adapting existing policy initiatives. As Figure 1.5 shows, countries
participating in the EC -OECD STIP Survey in mid -2021 reported adapting around 15% of all STI policy
initiatives to respond to COVID-19. Many programmes and policy initiatives introduced flexible eligibility
criteria, application requirements and/or deadlines for funding. Many also prioritised support for research
and innovation related to COVID -19. Finally, three times as many initiatives increased funding than
decreased it.
Figure 1.5. Shifts in existing STI policies in response to COVID-19
Number of policy initiatives as reported in the EC-OECD STIP Survey, June 2021

Note: Data based on country responses to the EC-OECD STIP Survey 2021, specifically the following question in the “policy initiative fiche”:
“Any shifts related to COVID-19”?
Source: EC-OECD STIP Compass, https://stip.oecd.org (accessed 7 February 2023).
1. https://stip.oecd.org/stip/covid-portal.
2. Of the 932 policy initiatives in the COVID-19 Watch database, just 76 were initiated in the first 6 months of 2021.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/2ohl3z
0 50 100 150 200
Horizontal STI coordination bodies
Policy intelligence
Procurement programmes for R&D and innovation
Creation or reform of governance structure or public body
Networking and collaborative platforms
Institutional funding for public research
Formal consultation of stakeholders or experts
Information services and access to datasets
Public awareness campaigns and other outreach activities
Strategies, agendas and plans
Grants for business R&D and innovation
Project grants for public research
Number of instruments
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Reduced funding
Increased funding
Prioritised COVID-related research/innovation support
Introduced flexible eligibility criteria, application requirements
and/or deadlines for funding
Number of initiatives

===== PDF_PAGE 24 =====
22 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Translating policy initiatives into research funding
The research community translated much of this COVID -19 policy support into funded research projects
covering a variety of topics. The UK Collaborative on Development Research (UKCDR)4/GloPID-R COVID-
19 Research Project Tracker has collected data on almost 18 000 research projects with funding of over
USD 8 billion between the start of the pandemic and September 2022.5 The tracker maps research projects
against the priorities identified in the World Health Organization (WHO) Coordinated Global Research
Roadmap for COVID -19 (WHO, 2020 [5]) to help funders and researchers prioritise resources for
underfunded areas with the greatest research need. This mapping against the WHO priorities shows that
4% of research projects in the database target vaccine R&D yet account for 25% of the awarded fu nding,
while 36% target the social sciences yet account for 16% of funding (Figure 1.6).6
Such comparisons should be interpreted with care. For examp le, it is well established that social science
projects typically rely on less funding than their science, technology and engineering counterparts. There
also exists evidence that the social sciences and humanities were less well organised than their biomedical
counterparts to respond effectively to the demands of a complex crisis like COVID -19 (see Chapter 4 for
further discussion on the subject). The real outlier, however, is the scale of support for vaccine research,
as compared, for example, to research on candidate therapeutics, which accounted for around 12% of
total funding (approximately USD 1 billion) and 10% of research projects, with an average project size of
approximately half a million USD. This reflects the high priority given to the developme nt and availability
of vaccines, particularly in the early phases of the pandemic, where infection prevention was greatly
emphasised. Ongoing OECD work on mapping government R&D project funding for COVID -19 provides
a picture consistent with these findings (OECD, forthcoming[6]).
Figure 1.6. COVID-19 funded research projects mapped against WHO “research priorities”

Note: Some projects have been assigned to more than one WHO priority area. There are 20 272 projects included in total.
Source: OECD calculation, based on data from the UKCDR and Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease Preparedness (GloPID -
R) COVID-19 Research Project Tracker, https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/covid-circle/covid-19-research-project-tracker/ (accessed 15 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/icpan2
1. Virus: natural history,
transmission and diagnostics
2. Animal and
environmental
research
3. Epidemiological studies
4. Clinical characterization and
management
5. Infection prevention and
control
6. Candidate therapeutics R&D
7. Candidate vaccine R&D
8. Ethics considerations for research
9. Social sciences in the outbreak
response
 0
 500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
 0 1 000 2 000 3 000 4 000 5 000 6 000 7 000 8 000
Funding (million USD)
Number of research projects

===== PDF_PAGE 25 =====
 23
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Translating research into COVID-19 knowledge and vaccines
The 2021 edition of the STI Outlook (OECD, 2021[2]) highlighted the rapid and massive response of the
research community to the pandemic, as measured by bibliometric analysis and the progress of clinical
trials. Already at the time of writing in late 2020, the first COVID -19 vaccines were in the final stag es of
approval and about to be launched. Two years on, several effective vaccines have been developed using
different technologies ( Figure 1.7) and te sted and rolled out in record time. This is an outstanding
demonstration of what can be done when academia and industry effectively combine resources (see
Chapter 4). The creation of different – and often novel – vaccine platforms is also a welcome development
that could have far-reaching benefits across medical science. It is estimated that COVID-19 vaccines had
saved 20 million lives by mid-2022, although this number could have been greater if vaccine coverage had
been more equitable (Watson et al., 2022[7]). The earliest COVID -19 vaccines continue to dominate the
marketplace and there are now fewer new vaccines under development than in the first half of 2022
(Figure 1.8).
Figure 1.7. COVID-19 vaccine candidates, by technology platform and clinical trial phase
Number of vaccines under development

Note: The “live attenuated” technology platform corresponds to vaccines that use a weakened version of the virus that replicates without causing
disease. “Inactivated” vaccines are a version of the actual virus grown and chemically inactivated. “Viral vector” vaccines are based on another
virus with spike protein which has been disabled from replication. “Protein -subunit” vaccines are based on viral subunits expressed via various
cell lines to stimulate immune response. “Genetic-code” vaccines use deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) or ribonucleic acid (RNA) to create antigens
for the immune system to target. Definitions taken from https://sidp.org/resources/Documents/COVID19/Jeannettee%20Bouchard
%20General%20Information%2012.28.2020.pdf.
Source: OECD calculations based on WHO, https://www.who.int/teams/blueprint/covid-19/covid-19-vaccine-tracker-and-landscape (accessed
6 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/j7qe5o

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Genetic-code Inactivated Live Attenuated Protein-subunit Viral vector
NA Phase 1 Phase 1/2 Phase 2 Phase 2 Phase 2/3 Phase 3 Phase 4

===== PDF_PAGE 26 =====
24 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.8. Trends in registered COVID-19 vaccine studies, by clinical trial phases
Numbers of clinical trials by phases, January 2020 to December 2022

Note: Biomedical clinical trials of experimental drug, treatment, device or behavioural intervention may proceed through four phase s.
Phase 1: Clinical trials test a new biomedical intervention in a small group of people (e.g. 20-80) for the first time to evaluate safety
(e.g. determine a safe dosage range and identify side effects). Phase 2: Clinical trials study the biomedical or behavioural intervention in a larger
group of people (several hundred) to determine efficacy and further evaluate its safety. Phase 3: Studies investigate the efficacy of the
biomedical or behavioural intervention in large groups of human subjects (from severa l hundred to several thousand) by comparing the
intervention to other standard or experimental interventions, as well as monitoring adverse effects and collecting informatio n that will allow the
intervention to be used safely. Phase 4: Studies are conducted after the intervention has been marketed. These studies are designed to monitor
the effectiveness of the approved intervention in the general population and collect information about any adverse effects associated with its
widespread use. Definition of phases from the WHO glossary: https://www.who.int/clinical-trials-registry-platform.
Source: OECD calculations based on United States National Institutes of Health (NIH), ClinicalTrials. gov,
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results/map?term=AREA%5BInterventionType%5D+%28Drug+OR+Biological%29&cond=COVID-19&intr=vaccine
(accessed 18 January 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/853jz0
Figure 1.9 shows the number of COVID -19-related clinical studies, as registered with the United States
National Institutes of Health (NIH) by September 2022. Panel A shows that the United States, followed by
China, have by far the most COVID -19 vaccine clinical studies. Between them, they have more vaccine
studies than the next nine ranked countries combined. Panel B shows the United States to be an outlier
on COVID-19 drug studies with more than 650 studies, compared to 164 studies for second-placed Brazil.
This concentration is partly explained by country size, but the data also show that clinical trials have been
carried out widely across the world. A criticism of the biomedical response to COVID-19 is that there were
too many uncoordinated clinical studies and too few clinical trials with sufficient participants to draw
statistically significant conclusions (see Chapter 4). So the large number of clinical studies shown in
Figure 1.9 should not necessarily be interpreted as a wholly positive development.

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2020Q1 2020Q2 2020Q3 2020Q4 2021Q1 2021Q2 2021Q3 2021Q4 2022Q1 2022Q2 2022Q3 2022Q4
Early Phase 1 Phase 1 Phase 1|Phase 2 Phase 2
Phase 2|Phase 3 Phase 3 Phase 4
Phase 3
Phase 1
Early phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 4
Phase 1|Phase 2
Phase 2|Phase 3

===== PDF_PAGE 27 =====
 25
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.9. Registered COVID-19 vaccine and drug studies by economy, as of 6 February 2023

Note: The charts show the numbers of COVID -19 studies registered at the NIH (ClinicalTrials.gov). The International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors requires trial registration as a condition of the publication of research results generated by a clinical trial. Multi-economy registered
studies are counted in each economy. Note that the number of studies is not necessarily indicative of the breadth or depth of the studies
conducted within each territory.
Source: NIH, ClinicalTrials.gov (accessed 6 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/q80nsb
At the same time, vaccine competition between governments has been rife and influenced in part by
geopolitical tensions, creating a global patchwork of vaccine approvals. By mid-2022, China had approved
eight vaccines, all but one developed domestically; Russia had approved six vaccines, all developed
domestically; and France, Japan and the United States had yet to approve any Chinese, Indian or Russian-
developed vaccines ( Table 1.1). The dominant vaccine narrative has been compared to the historical
space or nuclear arms “races”, despite the pandemic being a global challenge (Wilson Center, 2022 [8]).
The vaccine “nationalism” and “diplomacy” that some countries pursued raises serious concerns about
strategic competition in other technology areas and the prospects for future STI co -operation on global
challenges (like climate change). Chapter 2 further discusses this issue.
Table 1.1. Approval of selected vaccines in selected countries, as of July 2022

United States
France
Japan
Mexico
Brazil
China
India
Indonesia
Russia
South Africa
Johnson & Johnson (USA) √ √ √ √ √

√ √

√
Moderna (USA) √ √ √ √

√ √

 A. Economies with 20 or more listed vaccine studies B. Economies with 30 or more listed drug studies
20
20
21
22
23
24
27
27
28
30
32
32
42
135
148
0 10 20 30 40
Mexico
Korea
Spain
Indonesia
Russian Federation
United Kingdom
South Africa
France
Turkey
Canada
Germany
Australia
Brazil
China
United States
Number of studies
30
30
30
31
35
41
43
44
50
50
52
62
66
74
74
86
93
95
98
107
113
124
147
164
657
0 50 100 150 200
Japan
Netherlands
Poland
Switzerland
Israel
Korea
Pakistan
Colombia
Belgium
Turkey
South Africa
India
Argentina
Germany
Canada
Russian Federation
Italy
United Kingdom
Egypt
Mexico
China
France
Spain
Brazil
United States
Number of studies

===== PDF_PAGE 28 =====
26 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Pfizer/BioNTech (USA/Germany) √ √ √ √ √ √

√

√
Oxford/AstraZeneca (UK)

√ √ √ √

√

Sinopharm/Beijing (China)

√

√

√

√
Sinovac (China)

√ √ √

√

√
CanSino (China)

√

√

√

Covaxin (India)

√ √

√

Sputnik V (Russia)

√ √

√ √ √

Note: USA = United States; UK = United Kingdom.
Source: OECD analysis based on UNICEF COVID -19 Market Dashboard data, https://www.unicef.org/supply/covid-19-market-dashboard
(accessed 25 September 2022).

Outlook on COVID-19 and STI
The COVID-19 pandemic is not yet over, and its far-reaching consequences will unfold well into the future.
Further variants of concern could emerge, requiring a continuous stream of updated vaccines until
vaccinology develops more universal protection (International Science Council, 2022 [9]). Disparities in
access, distribution and uptake of vaccines remain a major source of uncertainty, given that new variants
are more likely to arise from unvaccinate d and immunocompromised people. By mid -2022, the WHO
estimated that almost one billion people in low -income countries remained unvaccinated. 7 This was not
due to a lack of vaccine supply – as was the case in much of 2021 – but to rollout problems caused by
operational and financial capacity gaps, insufficient political commitment, and vaccine hesitancy driven by
misinformation and disinformation.
Multilateralism is key for effective responses to the pandemic
Effective multilateral actions are still require d to provide technical and financial assistance that will help
overcome the myriad domestic logistical hurdles facing COVID -19 vaccine deployment. To review
experiences gained and lessons learned from the international health response to COVID -19, the WHO
set up an Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response in late 2020. The panel published
its main report in May 2021, identifying weak links at every point in the chain and recommending a package
of reforms to transform the system to enhance pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. A one-
year review of progress that followed in May 2022 lamented the lack of investment, co -ordination and
ambition to transform the system, resulting in limited and inequitable access to COVID -19 vaccines, tests
and therapies (Johnson Sirleaf and Clark, 2022 [10]). Estimates vary, but recent research suggests that
more than one million lives could have been saved in 2021 alone if COVID -19 vaccines had been shared
more equitably with low- and middle-income regions (Ledford, 2022[11]). More recently, limited supplies and
the high costs of COVID-19 antivirals have similarly restricted their flow to low-income countries (Ledford,
2022[12]).
Efforts have been made to expand equitable access to COVID -19 vaccines, notably through firms’ non -
profit agreements (e.g. the Oxford-AstraZeneca partnership), voluntary licensing arrangements (e.g. the
Medicines Patent Pool), and the scale -up of local manufacturing capacity in low - and middle -income
countries (e.g. plans by Moderna and BioNTech to set up manufacturing in Africa). However, the global
architecture to provide access to vaccines, diagnostics and genomic sequencing – notably the Access to
COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator, which includes COVAX – has not met expectations, owing to
insufficient funding, wealthier -country hoarding and logistical challenge s, among other factors (Johnson
Sirleaf and Clark, 2022[10]).
Several OECD countries have announced substantial STI investments to improve pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response. For example, J apan recently set up the Strategic Center of Biomedical
Advanced Vaccine Research and Development for Preparedness and Response (SCARDA), which will

===== PDF_PAGE 29 =====
 27
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

invest in vaccine research on a range of pathogens (including coronaviruses) using a range of technologies
for vaccine delivery. With an initial investment of USD 2 billion over five years, SCARDA aims to produce
diagnostic tests, treatments and vaccines that will be ready for large -scale production within the first
100 days following the identification of a pa thogen with pandemic potential (Mallapaty, 2022 [13]).
Investments have also been made in antiviral therapeutics. For example, the US National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases launched the Antiviral Drug Discovery Centers for Pathogens of Pandemic
Concern in 2021, endowed with USD 1.2 billion to fund basic research on developing antivirals for
seven virus families (Kozlov, 2022[14]). Drawing on a philanthropic donation of AUS 250 million (Australian
dollars), the Cumming Global Centre for Pandemic Therapeutics in Australia was launched in 2022 to
create drugs within weeks or months of future infectious disease outbreaks (Nelson, 2022 [15]). What
characterises these new centres is the range of drug platforms they plan to exploit to deal rapidly and in
multiple ways with an array of microbial threats.
These are welcome new investments in OECD countries, but a co -ordinated response is also needed to
promote longer-term vaccine and therapeutic innovation that includes technical, production and quality -
control capacities in low-income countries (International Science Council, 2022[16]). The uneven distribution
of research infrastructure capacities at the global level has prevented equitable access to resources and
data in many parts of the world, contributing to a disconnect between needs and resources (see Chapter 4).
Moreover, the study of COVID-19 variants is largely concentrated in high-income and upper-middle-income
countries, even though several dominant variants were first identified in low- and middle-income countries.8
If global vac cination coverage remains unequal, it will be important to develop research capacity that
includes more low -income countries, in order to investigate the emergence of variants (UKCDR and
GloPID-R, 2022[17]). Research funders have recognised the problem, allocating around USD 200 million
globally for COVID -19 projects aiming to strengthen research capacity. Most of these projects focus on
reinforcing laboratory capacity in low- and middle-income countries (UKCDR and GloPID-R, 2022[18]). Such
a strengthening of research capacity is an important contribution to health-crisis preparedness, but should
be extended to provide effective global action for other ongoing and future crises, notably the climate crisis
and the need for green transitions. As highlighted in Chapter 4, many countries and organisations have
started their own evaluations of their response to COVID -19, and STI performance and future
preparedness should be an important focus of such exercises.
The pandemic is a sociopolitical challenge that creates multiple risks and uncertainties
Like all health crises, COVID -19 is a broader sociopolitical challenge, but was widely perceived at the
outset as a mainly biomedical challenge. In most countries, the biomedical community and its relevant
research-funding institutions took the lead in establishing national research agendas. These were too
narrowly focused and failed to address all aspects of the crisis from a scientific perspective (see Chapter 4).
Furthermore, the pandemic’s health impacts have gone well beyond those associated with the
SARS‑CoV‑2 virus: public health interventions targeting COVID-19 often caused disruptions in healthcare
delivery for other conditions, including cancer and heart disease, while access to immunisation services
for common childhood illnesses fell in many low - and middle-income countries (UKCDR and GloPID -R,
2023[19]). The WHO (2022) also estimates that the global prevalence of anxiety and depression increased
by 25% during the first year of the pandemic.
“Long COVID” is another uncertainty, with a persisting lack of consensus on a clear definition of the
condition, its clinical characterisation and management, and appropriate support for sufferers. According
to data from UKCDR and the GloPID -R COVID-19 Research Project Tracker (UKCDR and GloPID -R,
2022[20]), at least USD 218 million targeted long COVID research as of September 2022, with projects
largely concentrated in Europe (48%) and North America (39%).
Finally, mis- and disinformation have been particularly problematic globally (see Chapter 4 and (OECD,
2022[21]), with studies showing a directional relationship between online misinformation and vaccine

===== PDF_PAGE 30 =====
28 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

hesitancy (e.g. (Pierri et al., 2022[22]). As highlighted in Chapter 4, this is a complex problem with no easy
solution. Policy responses range from improving the digital and scientific literacy of citizens and policy
makers, to promoting active involvement by behavioural and social scientists to pro vide the necessary
background for communicating relevant and useful information to different communities.
STI and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
Both Russia and Ukraine are relatively minor players in the international STI landscape, so that th e war
has had few direct impacts on STI activities in OECD countries. Russia’s relative scientific decline in recent
decades has made it easier for OECD countries to sever their ties without seriously undermining their own
scientific efforts (Johnson Sirleaf and Clark, 2022 [10]). The European Union quickly excluded Russia from
Horizon Europe following the invasion. Some months later, the United States announced its intention to
wind down government-to-government research collaboration with Russia, and advised US agencies and
government labs to curtail interaction with the leadership of universities and institutions affiliated with the
Russian government (Hudson, 2022[23]).
Science “sanctions” like these are unprecedented, and form part of a wider campaign of economic and
trade penalties that are meant to deter Russia (Hudson et al., 2022[24]). It is too early to assess their impacts
on Russian science, but there exist STI areas where Russia excels and has strong ties with STI activities
by OECD countries, which have been adversely affected by these sanctions. In the space sector, for
example, where Russia has deep and extensive capabilities (Undseth and Jolly, 2022 [25]), the ExoMars
project, a EUR 1.3 billion (euros) joint Europe -Russia mission, has been severely delayed. In Arctic
research – much of which is crucial to understanding and monitoring climate change – European scientists
have had to suspend collaboration with their Russian counterparts owing to restrictions imposed by their
funding agencies or institutions (Gaind et al., 2022[26]).
Besides these disruptions in particular STI fields, the indirect impacts on STI are far greater. The projected
economic slowdown in 2023, and the highest rates of inflation seen since the 1980s, could i mpact
STI expenditures. Rising debt service burdens are also set to compound challenges for public finances
(OECD, 2022[1]), which could put further pressure on public funding of R&D. The goal of reducing reliance
on f ossil-fuel supplies from Russia has also lent new urgency to STI investments in clean energy and
energy efficiency. Fossil-fuel dependency on Russia has more immediate impacts, however, with scientific
infrastructures in Europe – notably particle accelerat ors, high -power lasers, gamma beams, and
supercomputing facilities and data centres – facing massively increased energy bills. This is leading some
infrastructures to cut back on experiments (Owens, 2022[27]), (Zubașcu, 2022[28]). The spectre in late-2022
of energy rationing and even rolling blackouts has not materialised, however, although it has drawn greater
attention to reducing the carbon footprint of science.9
Impacts on STI activities in Ukraine
The impacts of the war on Ukraine’s STI activities have been devastating. Many of its research institutions
have been bombed, and around one-quarter of its research workforce fled the country in the early months
of the conflict (Nature, 2022 [29]). By October 2022, with Russian attacks on Ukraine’s critical civilian
infrastructures, like electricity and water, scientific experiments had become almost impossible. Box 1.2
provides a snapshot of Ukraine’s science system in recent years, showing a system in transition prior to
Russia’s aggression.10

===== PDF_PAGE 31 =====
 29
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 1.2. Ukraine: A science system in transition, with core strengths
For several years prior to Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine, science and research in Ukraine had
been in transition, with significant structural changes taking place in the face of strong budgetary pressure.
Domestic expenditure on R&D as a p ercentage of GDP fell by about one -third between 2013 and 2018
(Figure 1.10). The number of researchers shrank from over 52 000 full-time equivalents in 2013 to 41 000
in 2018. This evolution was marked by a steep drop in researchers working in business and governmen t
institutions, which was only partly offset by an increase in researchers from higher education institutions.
Figure 1.10. Domestic R&D expenditure as a percentage of GDP (Ukraine, Russia, EU27 and OECD)

Note: OECD R&D statistics and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS) for Ukraine, February 2023.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/pzxhn9
This reorientation towards higher education, together with an increase in international collaborations, helps
explain an impressive rise in both the number and quality of Ukrainian scientific publications, from only 2%
among the global top 10% most cited in their fields in 2006 to 6% in 2020 (Figure 1.11).
Figure 1.11. Quantity and citation impact of scientific production in Ukraine, 2006-20

Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus C ustom Data, Elsevier, Version 5.2021, September 2021,
https://public.flourish.studio/story/1266872/; https://public.flourish.studio/story/1458190/; and https://public.flourish.stu dio/story/1458190/
(accessed on 23 November 2022).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/mcr19n
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
EU (27) OECD - Total Russian Federation Ukraine%
OECD
EU (27)
Russian Federation
Ukraine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
14 000
16 000
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Publications, fractional counts Top 10% cited, share (right-hand scale) %

===== PDF_PAGE 32 =====
30 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Ukrainian scientific output shows above -average specialisation and expertise (proxied by citation impact)
in areas such as computer science and energy (Ukrainian nuclear engineers are involved in new nuclear
build programmes around the world). Although less specialised, Ukrainian scientific output also excels in
the areas of Earth and planetary sciences and environmental science, although engineering is the largest
field in terms of total outpu t. All these domains are closely linked to Ukrainian industry and are crucial to
economic development. As reported in the EC-OECD STIP Compass, Ukraine’s main thematic STI policy
strategies in 2021 focused on aerospace11 and artificial intelligence (AI).1
A significant proportion of Ukraine’s scientific publication output has resulted from international
collaborations and partnerships. Since 2014, Ukraine has managed to halt the progressive decline in
international collaboration seen in previous years, which likely played an important role in raising the overall
competitiveness of its science. There has been a strategic focus in Ukraine on building international
partnerships, as well as shifts in collaboration patterns. Russia -based scientists used to be the most
frequent partners for Ukraine-based authors, but Polish-based scientists have emerged more recently as
preferred partners (Figure 1.12).
Figure 1.12. Ukraine’s top scientific collaboration partners, 2010, 2015 and 2020
Whole counts: Number of documents co-authored with partner country

Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 5.2021, September 2021,
https://public.flourish.studio/visualisation/9410350/ (accessed 23 November 2022).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/tuh5mf
As reported in the 2021 edition of the EC -OECD STIP Compass, 2 one of the key structural problems
hindering Ukrainian research and innovation activity prior to the war was the persistent net outflow of
talented scientists and inventors. This led to a debate on ways to support these valuable human resources
in the country and prevent “brain drain”. Indeed, analysis of changes in affiliations of scientific authors over
2010-20 reveal that Ukraine had a bilateral deficit with most countries where high mobility was observed,
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
1 000
1 200
1 400
1 600
2010 2015 2020
Poland Russian Federation Germany United States China
United Kingdom France Italy Czech Republic Spain
Poland
Russian Federation
Germany
United States
ChinaUnited Kingdom Italy
Czech Republic
Spain
France

===== PDF_PAGE 33 =====
 31
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

particularly Russia. The war is certain to change the longer -term mobility patterns of many Ukrainian
students and scientists, with long-lasting impacts.
1. https://stip.oecd.org/stip/interactive-dashboards/policy-initiatives/2021%2Fdata%2FpolicyInitiatives%2F99993318.
2. https://stip.oecd.org/stip/interactive-dashboards/countries/Ukraine.
Source: (OECD, 2022[30]).
International support for Ukrainian STI
Many countries and scientific institutions have put in place various arrangements to support Ukraine’s
science system (OECD, 2022 [30]). These include temporary measures to host Ukrainian students and
researchers, providing safe havens in which they can continue their studies and conduct research. For
example, the European Commission’s Horizon Europe programme made available EUR 25 million early in
the crisis to facilitate and enable this support, and address the immediate and urgent humanitarian
challenge.12 The European Commission has also launched a one -stop-shop for information and support
services provided to Ukraine -based researchers and researchers fleeing Ukraine. 13 On the innovation
front, the European Innovation Council has agreed to provide a total E UR 20 million in funding to the
Ukrainian innovation community. It will provide up to EUR 60 000 in direct financial support to at least
200 Ukrainian technological start-ups that remain and work in Ukraine, as well as to those that relocate to
the European Union during the war (Council, 2022[31]).
Solidarity is pervasive at the global level, as demonstrated by the inventory of offers of assistance and
statements of support from science organisations. 14 For instance, the Polish Academy of Sciences, with
support from the US National Academies of Science, has launched an initiative to help Ukrainian
researchers settle in neighbouring Poland. 15 Many refugee scientists and students have already been
accepted i nto Polish research institutions. This offers an opportunity to step up scientific partnerships
between these two countries, with immediate benefits for Poland and longer-term possibilities for Ukraine.
However, Poland will require support and solidarity from other countries and the European Union if it is to
effectively perform this temporary hosting role. This includes support for those who choose to return to
Ukraine and promoting new sustainable, long -term partnerships between research institutions, to be
maintained once the war is over (OECD, 2022[30]).
As highlighted in Box 1.2, Ukraine has longstanding “brain drain” challenges, which the war could
exacerbate. There is a long history of scientists leaving their hom e countries during times of conflict or
political crisis, and then struggling to return or contribute effectively as a diaspora once the crisis is over.
In an ultra -competitive international science system, where talent is at a premium, many of the best
Ukrainian scientists or students may be tempted to stay in their new homes rather than return to institutions
that have been subjected to the ravages of war. At the individual level, this would be a very legitimate and
understandable choice. The long -term po licy aim should be to support genuine brain circulation and
partnership between neighbouring countries, rather than pursuing brain gains at the expense of other
countries (OECD, 2022[30]).
The OECD has highlighted the following key considerations for policy makers (OECD, 2022[30]):
 Considering the risks posed by “brain drain” to the future of science in Ukraine, OECD countries
should aim to promote genuine brain circulation, and th e establishment of sustainable and
productive long-term partnerships with Ukrainian scientific institutions.16
 Individual mobility and international networks can provide the basis for productive future
partnerships between Ukrainian research institutes and universities and their counterparts across
the world.

===== PDF_PAGE 34 =====
32 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

 Policy measures to support refugee scientists from Ukraine should be designed from the outset to
ensure they are able to maintain strong links with their home institutions and colleagues, so that
the current brain exodus can be rapidly reversed once the war is over.
 Members of the Ukrainian scientific diaspora should be considered as a strategic asset both for
their country of origin and their country of destination. With appropriate support, they can pl ay an
important role in brokering or building partnerships.
 Digital tools and open access to scientific data and publications can provide the basis for much
research to continue remotely, even when research institutions are closed or scientists are also
contributing to the war effort.
A growing “securitisation” of STI policy?
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is expected to lead to increased expenditures on defence R&D.
However, perceived security threats go well beyond traditional defence concerns , extending to a range of
issues that have implications for STI policy. These include:
 using STI to reduce systemic risks, e.g. to enhance food security, energy security, health security
and cybersecurity
 managing technological change responsibly to reduce a range of risks, e.g. those associated with
AI, synthetic biology and neurotechnology
 mitigating and adapting to the climate crisis , which is increasingly framed in terms of the threats it
poses to national security
 reducing vulnerabilities from trade dependencies in high-tech and other strategic goods, leading to
a push for “technology sovereignty” and “open strategic autonomy”.
Together with the impacts of the pandemic, these pressures have drawn attention to risk, uncertainty and
resilience as conditions and concerns for STI policy. They have contributed to a growing “securitisation” of
STI policies, where economic competitiveness rationales for policy intervention interact with rationales
emphasising national security, sustainability transitions and (to a much lesser extent) inclusion. Chapter 3
discusses the rationales for sustainability transitions and their implications for STI policies. This chapter
discusses selected security concerns, specifically regarding d efence R&D expenditures, biosecurity and
research security. Chapter 2 covers how security concerns related to technology dependencies are
increasingly framing STI policy agendas through concepts such as “technology sovereignty” and “open
strategic autonomy”.
Defence R&D spending
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine has cast a spotlight on the role of science and technology in
defence. Discovering, developing and utilising advanced knowledge and cutting -edge systems is
fundamental to maintaining or ach ieving a technological edge for purposes of defence and deterrence.
OECD statistics on GBARD (OECD, 2022[3]) provide some insights on the extent to which governments
direct public funds to R&D for military purposes. They show that defence R&D, which has grown the least
in real terms since 1991, has been experiencing a sustained recovery in recent years ( Figure 1.13). With
total defence expenditures expected to increase in several OECD countries in the coming years, the
recovery in defence R&D expenditures could gather pace.

===== PDF_PAGE 35 =====
 33
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 1.13. Trends in total and defence government R&D budgets 1991-2021

Note: The OECD estimation includes all Member countries of the OECD except Costa Rica.
Source: OECD R&D statistics, September 2022 (accessed 27 November 2022). See OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators Database,
http://oe.cd/msti, for most up-to-date OECD indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ki7h8b
Across the OECD, an estimated 0.15% of GDP is dedicated to defence R&D budgets (OECD, 2022[3]). To
put this figure in context, this represents about 7.5% of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation guideline for
total defence expenditure as a share of GDP.17 The distribution of military R&D budgets is highly skewed:
the United States reports the largest R&D budget support for defence as a percentage of GDP, followed
by Korea, France and the United Kingdom ( Figure 1.14). In Europe, many countries are planning to
increase expenditure on defence; a few countries, such as Germany and Poland, have already announced
a large increase (0.5-1% of GDP per year) for 2022/23 (OECD, 2022[32]).
Figure 1.14. R&D budgets for defence in selected countries
Percentage of GDP

Note: The OECD estimation includes all Member countries of the OECD except Costa Rica,
Source: OECD calculations based on OECD R&D statistics, September 2022 (accessed 23 November 2022) . See OECD Main Science and
Technology Indicators Database, http://oe.cd/msti, for most up-to-date OECD indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/9nzbpl
60
100
140
180
220
Total GBARD Defence
Constant prices and PPP USD, Index 1991=100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2021 (or latest year available) 2011 (or closest year available)%
0
0.01
0.02 Magnified

===== PDF_PAGE 36 =====
34 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Biosecurity
Synthetic biology 18 is a promising field that could help tackle current and future challenges, including
through treating infectious and genetic diseases (Khan et al., 2022 [33]), preventing food shortages
(Mudziwapasi et al., 2022[34]) and mitigating the impacts of climate change (DeLisi, 2019[35]). At the same
time, the field comes with inherent risks, centred on dual-use research and deliberate misuse. These risks
cannot be eliminated – only managed. Yet there is consensus across the academic literature that public
bodies are underprepared for the risks stemming from rapid advances in synthetic biology (OECD,
forthcoming[36]). An engineered pandemic -class agent (Bakerlee, 2021[37]) with a higher case fatality rate
and transmissibility than SARS -CoV-2 could overwhelm the insufficient detection and response systems
that exist today (Bell and Nuzzo, 2021 [38]), potentially leading to a breakdown of critical food, water and
power distribution systems, and local civilisational collapse. Possible countermeasures include untargeted
metagenomic sequencing to enable early detection of emergin g pandemics 19 and improvements in
response capacities – for example, by stockpiling personal protective equipment, and using safe pathogen-
killing lights and improved ventilation to block pathogen transmission. 20 Besides detection and response
capacities, prevention countermeasures are also required, including measures to delay the proliferation of
pandemic-class agents (Box 1.3). Managing these risks is a balancing act between supporting scientific
advancements for the betterment of humanity and implementing appropriate measures against biosecurity
threats (OECD, forthcoming[36]).
Box 1.3. Preventive measures to counter risks from synthetic biology
Part of the concern around rapid advances in synthetic biology is that non-state actors may have easier
access to technologies or viral agents. Following the 1995 chemical weapon attack in the Tokyo subway
and the 2001 Anthrax attack in the United States, the discourse shifted to non-state actors yet regulatory
gaps remain, primarily relating to prevention (Rabitz, 2014[39]). Additionally, dual-use research that can
serve civil and defence aims remains largely un addressed, and there currently exist no internationally
recognised guidelines for covering high-risk dual-use research.
Key technologies of concern include DNA synthesis and virus assembly, gene editing and gene drives,
and cell -free and life -similar biote chnology. Taking just DNA synthesis and virus assembly as an
example, detailed step -by-step virus assembly protocols (Xie et al., 2021 [40]) allow an increasing
number of individuals to assemble numerou s viruses from a genome sequence. Today, perhaps
30 000 individuals can generate infectious samples of influenza viruses using standard laboratory
equipment, and perhaps one-tenth as many can generate corona-, adeno- and paramyxoviruses.
Viral agents are far more accessible than nuclear arms, but apart from smallpox — which due to its size
and complexity, can only be assembled by perhaps 100 individuals globally — there exist no credible
blueprints for pandemic -capable agents that a malicious actor could u se to ignite a new pandemic.
However, this information could soon be provided by well -meaning scientists. For example, ongoing
efforts such as the Global Virome Project 1 are working to discover and characterise novel viruses
(Sandbrink et al., 2022 [41]) by performing identification experiments that assess whether a virus is
capable of causing a pandemic, then sharing them in a public list rank-ordered by perceived threat level
(SpillOver, 2022[42]). Other labs aim to enhance the infectiousness of highly lethal but poorly transmitted
viruses through “gain-of-function” experiments (Herfst et al., 2012[43]), without independent oversight. If
the genome sequences of sufficient pandemic-capable pathogens are shared publicly, many thousands
of individuals will immediately gain the ability to kill many millions.
Countermeasures are possible to prevent this scenario from happening. For example, a well-designed
“pandemic test -ban treaty” could ban pandemic virus identification experiments globally, preventing
respectable laboratories from sharing credibly hazardous results. In an era when scientists can design

===== PDF_PAGE 37 =====
 35
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Research security
Some governments and non -state actors are making increasingly forceful efforts to unfairly exploit and
skew the open research environment towards their own interests. Such efforts have become more
apparent as geopolitical tensions have mounted, and many co untries now consider unauthorised
information transfer and foreign interference in public research as serious national and economic security
risks. Governments are implementing measures to improve research security (see Box 1.4) while at the
same time emph asising the norms and principles that constitute good scientific practice – such as
academic freedom, openness, honesty and accountability – and regulate international research
collaboration – including reciprocity, equity and non -discrimination. A lack of shared and respected
international regulations and norms can lead not only to a misappropriation of research, but also to certain
types of research being selectively conducted in countries that do not impose legal or ethical restraints
(OECD, 2022[44]).
nucleic acid vaccines in a couple of days – as was the case with the COVID-19 Moderna and BioNTech
vaccines – these experiments are arguably unnecessary to develop vaccines rapidly.
Another counter -measure would be to introduce universal and secur e screening of synthetic
DNA orders. The assembly of engineered pathogens requires synthetic DNA that can be ordered by
mail. The International Gene Synthesis Consortium, 2 a group of gene synthesis companies that
voluntarily vet their customers and screen synthetic gene orders to identify potentially dangerous
sequences, is only responsible for 80% of such orders. Establishing universal and secure
DNA synthesis screening could prevent unauthorised access to dangerous sequences. Ongoing efforts
are under way to provide a freely available screening system, 3 which could then be integrated into all
DNA synthesis devices.
1 https://www.globalviromeproject.org.
2 https://genesynthesisconsortium.org.
3 https://www.securedna.org/main-en.
Source: (OECD, forthcoming[36]).
Box 1.4. Measures supporting research security and integrity
Responsibilities for research security and integrity are distributed across multiple actors, operating at
different scales in the international research ecosystem. These include national governments, research-
funding agencies, research institutions, universities, academic associations and intergovernmental
organisations.
Many governments have developed guidelines an d checklists to increase awareness of risks to
research security and integrity, frequently accompanied by policies and measures to mitigate these
risks. It is important these are proportionate and based on sound risk identification and assessments,
as not every research institution or research project will face the same level or type of risk. These
guidelines should also be regularly revisited and revised, as necessary. Some national policies identify
specific “sensitive” countries they consider liable to foreign interference, but many take country-agnostic
approaches.
In some countries, intelligence agencies, law enforcement agencies, research institutions and
universities have increased co -operation and information exchange to help researchers identify an d
manage risks, and strengthen security in international collaboration. However, maintaining institutional
autonomy in risk management and decision -making is key, not only to effectively identify risk but also
to gain crucial buy -in across the research sec tor. Several funding agencies have integrated risk

===== PDF_PAGE 38 =====
36 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Maintaining the balance between open and trust -based scientific collaboration, and protective but
potentially restrictive regulations, is a major challenge. Over -regulation or excessive intervention can
undermine the freedom of scientific enquiry and exchange. For example, while national governments have
routinely defined research on chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive technologies as
dual-use, and historically used conventional export control systems to prevent knowledge transfer, it is less
easy to control the transfer of data, information and know -how from scientific research carried out without
a specific practical aim. This means that basic research has traditionally been exempt from export controls.
At the same time, knowledge from many areas of fundamental research can arguably be considered as
potentially dual-use. For instance, AI or quantum computing have the potential for both civilian and military
use, in addition to be ing the focus of intense economic competition between companies, countries and
regions.
Outlook
There is a growing sense of multiple crises triggering turbulence, instability and insecurity in contemporary
societies. Crises are building up one after anoth er and interacting in unpredictable ways, with impacts on
economies, politics, the environment and global affairs. Even seemingly singular crises like the COVID-19
pandemic are complex, with cascading effects that have proven difficult to predict and resol ve. This
“polycrisis” (Homer-Dixon et al., 2022[47]) or “permacrisis”21 situation has presented decision makers with
a high degree of volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity. Policy needs to be more anticipatory,
systemic, inclusive and innovative to manage crises, and contribute to society’s capacity for resiliency and
adaptation to shocks. However, such policy qualities depend on government capacities which are often
lacking, and will take time and considerable investment to develop.
To a significant extent, STI provides economies and societies with built -in resiliency capacity. However, it
can only perform this role effectively if it is well -prepared to respond to known risks and unknown
uncertainties. Of course, good preparation requires long -term investments in R&D, skills, and research
and technical infrastructures, but these alone are insufficient. It also needs strong relationships in “normal
times” among those who should mobilise rapidl y to deal with crisis situations (de Silva et al., 2022[48]), as
well as a strong strategic intelligence capacity to identify, monitor and evaluate emerging risks and
responses.
The global nature of crises also calls for vibrant multilateralism and international solidarity. The COVID-19
response experience was mixed in this regard, demonstrating what could be done rapidly through
international co-operation but also its limits, particularly in the uneven international rollout of vaccines and
therapeutics. Vaccine nationalism and diplomacy are perhaps emblematic of international co -operation-
assessment and management in their funding application and review processes. Meanwhile,
universities are developing rules and guidelines to mitigate risks to research security, and protect the
integrity and freedom of scientific research.
At the intergovernmental level, the OECD has published a report on integrity and security in the global
research ecosystem (OECD, 2022[44]) and launched a web portal on research security.1 Group of Seven
(G7) countries, for their part, have established a working group on the security and integrity of the
research ecosystem. The G7 is also planning to develop a common set of principles to help protect the
research and innovation ecosyst em from risks to open and reciprocal research collaboration (G7-
Summit, 2022[45]). Finally, the European Commission recently published a toolkit on how to mitigate
foreign interference in research and innovation (European Commission, 2022[46]).
1. https://stip.oecd.org/stip/research-security-portal.
Source: (OECD, 2022[44]).

===== PDF_PAGE 39 =====
 37
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

competition dynamics that are likely to characterise the response to other crises, notably climate change
(see Chapter 3). Such dyna mics will continue to shape the ways in which research and innovation can
contribute to global crisis responses.
Finally, growing securitisation of STI offers opportunities, but also risks. On the one hand, framing global
problems like climate change, biodiversity loss and food insecurity as national security risks – on account
of their wide-ranging and unpredictable effects – further raises their profiles as problems requiring urgent
domestic action, including in STI. On the other hand, it could divert ST I from targeting other goals related
to sustainability transitions and social inclusion, as well as escalate international tensions. Part 2 discusses
this issue further.

References

Adepoju, P. (2022), “African coronavirus surveillance network provides early warning for world”,
Nature Biotechnology, Vol. 40/2, pp. 147-148, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41587-022-00003-3.
[52]
Bakerlee, C. (2021), Mother Nature is not ‘the ultimate bioterrorist’, STAT,
https://www.statnews.com/2021/01/08/mother-nature-is-not-the-ultimate-bioterrorist/
(accessed on 24 February 2023).
[37]
Barreneche, A. (2021), Tracking science and innovation policies in response to COVID-19,
https://stiplab.github.io/datastories/covid/covid_blog.html (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[4]
Bell, J. and J. Nuzzo (2021), Global Health Security Index: Advancing Collective Action and
Accountability Amid Global Crisis, Global Health Security Index,
https://www.ghsindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/2021_GHSindexFullReport_Final.pdf
(accessed on 24 February 2023).
[38]
Biasin, M. et al. (2021), “UV-C irradiation is highly effective in inactivating SARS-CoV-2
replication”, Scientific Reports, Vol. 11/1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-85425-w.
[51]
Council, I. (2022), Conference on the Ukraine Crisis: Responses from the European higher
education and research sectors, https://doi.org/10.24948/2022.04.
[31]
de Silva, M. et al. (2022), “How did COVID-19 shape co-creation?: Insights and policy lessons
from international initiatives”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers,
No. 134, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/e11c5274-en.
[48]
DeLisi, C. (2019), “The role of synthetic biology in climate change mitigation”, Biology Direct,
Vol. 14/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13062-019-0247-8.
[35]
European Commission (2022), “Tackling R&I foreign interference: staff working document”,
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/3faf52e8-79a2-11ec-9136-
01aa75ed71a1/language-en (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[46]
G7-Summit (2022), Annex to the G7 Science Ministers` Communiqué 2022: Further
Implementation and G7 Science Working Groups,
https://www.bmbf.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/de/2022/220613-g7-
annex.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=4 (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[45]

===== PDF_PAGE 40 =====
38 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Gaind, N. et al. (2022), “Seven ways the war in Ukraine is changing global science”, Nature,
Vol. 607/7919, pp. 440-443, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-01960-0.
[26]
Herfst, S. et al. (2012), “Airborne Transmission of Influenza A/H5N1 Virus Between Ferrets”,
Science, Vol. 336/6088, pp. 1534-1541, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1213362.
[43]
Homer-Dixon, T. et al. (2022), “A call for an international research program on the risk of a global
polycrisis”, https://cascadeinstitute.org/technical-paper/a-call-for-an-international-research-
program-on-the-risk-of-a-global-polycrisis/ (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[47]
Hudson, R. (2022), US to ‘wind down’ research collaboration with Russia, Science|Business,
https://sciencebusiness.net/news/us-wind-down-research-collaboration-russia (accessed 4
October 2022). (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[23]
Hudson, R. et al. (2022), “The conduct of science in times of war”, Science Business discussion
paper, Science|Business, https://sciencebusiness.net/report/conduct-science-times-war
(accessed 4 October 2022).
[24]
International Science Council (2022), Conference on the Ukraine Crisis: Responses from the
European higher education and research sectors - A Conference Report, International
Science Council, https://doi.org/10.24948/2022.04.
[9]
International Science Council (2022), Unprecedented &amp; Unfinished: COVID-19 and
Implications for National and Global Policy, International Science Council,
https://doi.org/10.24948/2022.03.
[16]
Johnson Sirleaf, E. and H. Clark (2022), Transforming or Tinkering? Inaction lays the
groundwork for another pandemic.
[10]
Khan, A. et al. (2022), “Combating Infectious Diseases with Synthetic Biology”, ACS Synthetic
Biology, Vol. 11/2, pp. 528-537, https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.1c00576.
[33]
Kozlov, M. (2022), “Why scientists are racing to develop more COVID antivirals”, Nature,
Vol. 601/7894, pp. 496-496, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-00112-8.
[14]
Ledford, H. (2022), “COVID vaccine hoarding might have cost more than a million lives”, Nature,
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-03529-3.
[11]
Ledford, H. (2022), “Donated COVID drugs start flowing to poor nations — but can’t meet
demand”, Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-02939-7.
[12]
Mallapaty, S. (2022), “Japan’s $2-billion initiative to prep pandemic vaccines in 100 days”,
Nature, Vol. 610/7930, pp. 20-20, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-03000-3.
[13]
Mudziwapasi, R. et al. (2022), “Unlocking the potential of synthetic biology for improving
livelihoods in sub-Saharan Africa”, All Life, Vol. 15/1, pp. 1-12,
https://doi.org/10.1080/26895293.2021.2014986.
[34]
Nature (2022), “Ukraine’s scientists need help to rebuild their research system”, Nature,
Vol. 609/7925, pp. 7-7, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-02760-2.
[29]
Nelson, F. (2022), “Billion-dollar project aims to prep drugs before the next pandemic”, Nature,
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-02776-8.
[15]

===== PDF_PAGE 41 =====
 39
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

OECD (2022), “Building back a better innovation ecosystem in Ukraine”, OECD Policy
Responses on the Impacts of the War in Ukraine, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://www.oecd.org/ukraine-hub/policy-responses/building-back-a-better-innovation-
ecosystem-in-ukraine-85a624f6/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[54]
OECD (2022), “Integrity and security in the global research ecosystem”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 130, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1c416f43-en.
[44]
OECD (2022), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2022 Issue 1, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/62d0ca31-en.
[32]
OECD (2022), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2022 Issue 2, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/f6da2159-en.
[1]
OECD (2022), OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators: Highlights – March 2022,
https://www.oecd.org/sti/msti-highlights-march-2022.pdf (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[3]
OECD (2022), Public communication and engagement in science: lessons learned from COVID -
19, https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/public-communication-engagement-in-science.htm
(accessed on 24 February 2023).
[21]
OECD (2022), “The future of science in Ukraine: Actions now will affect post-war recovery”,
OECD Policy Responses on the Impacts of the War in Ukraine, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/afbd05df-en.
[30]
OECD (2021), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021: Times of Crisis and
Opportunity, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/75f79015-en.
[2]
OECD (forthcoming), “Existential risks in synthetic biology: considerations and scenarios”. [36]
OECD (forthcoming), Measuring governments’ R&D funding response to COVID-19 with project
data: Preliminary analysis from the OECD Fundstat initiative.
[6]
Owens, B. (2022), “Energy crisis squeezes science at CERN and other major facilities”, Nature,
Vol. 610/7932, pp. 431-432, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-03257-8.
[27]
Pierri, F. et al. (2022), “Online misinformation is linked to early COVID-19 vaccination hesitancy
and refusal”, Scientific Reports, Vol. 12/1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-10070-w.
[22]
Rabitz, F. (2014), Regulatory Gaps in the Global Governance of Synthetic Biology. [39]
Sandbrink, J. et al. (2022), “Mitigating Biosecurity Challenges Associated with Zoonotic Risk
Prediction”, SSRN Electronic Journal, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4035760.
[41]
SpillOver (2022), SpillOver: Viral Risk Ranking, https://spillover.global (accessed on
24 February 2023).
[42]
Sun, T. et al. (2022), “Challenges and recent progress in the governance of biosecurity risks in
the era of synthetic biology”, Journal of Biosafety and Biosecurity, Vol. 4/1, pp. 59-67,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobb.2022.02.002.
[49]
Thompson, T. (2021), “Real-world data show that filters clean COVID-causing virus from air”,
Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-021-02669-2.
[50]

===== PDF_PAGE 42 =====
40 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

UKCDR and GloPID-R (2023), Indirect health impacts, https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2022/07/2-Tracker-Highlights-Template_Indirect-health-impacts.pdf
(accessed on 24 February 2023).
[19]
UKCDR and GloPID-R (2022), Long COVID, https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/UKCDR-140922-Tracker-Highlights-Long-Covid.pdf (accessed on
24 February 2023).
[20]
UKCDR and GloPID-R (2022), New variants, http://chrome-
extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/UKCDR-140922_new-variants.pdf (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[17]
UKCDR and GloPID-R (2022), Research Capacity Strengthening, https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/UKCDR_140922_Research-Capacity-Strengthening.pdf (accessed
on 24 February 2023).
[18]
Undseth, M. and C. Jolly (2022), “A new landscape for space applications: Illustrations from
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy
Papers, No. 137, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/866856be-en.
[25]
Waltz, E. (2022), “How nasal-spray vaccines could change the pandemic”, Nature,
Vol. 609/7926, pp. 240-242, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-02824-3.
[53]
Watson, O. et al. (2022), “Global impact of the first year of COVID-19 vaccination: a
mathematical modelling study”, The Lancet Infectious Diseases, Vol. 22/9, pp. 1293-1302,
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-3099(22)00320-6.
[7]
WHO, W. (2020), “A Coordinated Global Research Roadmap: 2019 Novel Coronavirus”. [5]
Wilson Center (2022), Reframing Vaccine Diplomacy Amid Strategic Competition: Lessons from
COVID-19.
[8]
Xie, X. et al. (2021), “Engineering SARS-CoV-2 using a reverse genetic system”, Nature
Protocols, Vol. 16/3, pp. 1761-1784, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-021-00491-8.
[40]
Zubașcu, F. (2022), Energy crisis is starting to hit Europe’s big science labs, Science|Business,
https://sciencebusiness.net/news/energy-crisis-starting-hit-europes-big-science-labs
(accessed on 24 February 2023).
[28]

===== PDF_PAGE 43 =====
 41
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Notes
1 In the context of this chapter, “securitisation” refers to the reframing of regular policy issues, such as climate change,
migration, and emerging technologies, into matters of “security”.
2 In the EU27 area, business R&D performance was the main reason for an aggregate fall in R&D expenditures. This
is because the structure of business R&D in the European Union is more concentrated in industries that were more
negatively impacted by the COVID-19 crisis (see below).
3 Estimates of real growth in R&D expenses for the ensemble of firms in the OECD SwiFTBeRD panel map very closely
the evolution of official business expenditure on R&D estimates over periods in which these are available. For example,
the final 2020 estimates of the September 2022 MSTI release confirm the “nowcasts” made in the March 2021 release
for 2020.
4 UKCDR (https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/) is a group of UK Government departments and research funders working in
international development research. UKCDR aims to amplify the value and impact of research for global development
by promoting coherence, collaboration and joint action among UK research funders.
5 This makes the UKCDR/GloPID-R COVID-19 Research Project Tracker (https://www.ukcdr.org.uk/covid-circle/covid-
19-research-project-tracker/) one of the most comprehensive databases on COVID -19 research projects, covering a
wide br eadth of research disciplines. However, because of limited data availability on funding, it significantly
underestimates the awarded total research funding.
6 776 projects targeting “candidate vaccine R&D” were awarded USD 2.3 billion, with another USD 1.4 billion going to
7 320 projects targeting “social sciences in the outbreak response”. This means that the average project size for
vaccine research was USD 3 million, compared to USD 195 000 for social sciences project – i.e. more than 15 times
larger.
7 The development of oral or nasal vaccines could be a game -changer for promoting global access. It could prevent
even mild cases of illness and block onward transmission (Waltz, 2022[53]).
8 As Omicron spread across the globe, South African labs were the first to detect it and flag it to the world. The Network
for Genomic Surveillance in South Africa first spotted the mutated variant in sequencing data from Botswana (Adepoju,
2022[52]).
9 In France, for example, the Agence Nationale de la Recherche is drawing up an “energy sobriety” plan that will
incorporate sustainability criteria in its project funding assessments.
10 In the context of the preparation of Ukraine’s National Recovery and Development Plan in May -June 2022, the
OECD contributed ideas on how Ukraine’s science, technology and innovation system could be reformed to better
contribute to the post-war reconstruction of its economy and society. These are summarised in (OECD, 2022[54]).
11 https://stip.oecd.org/stip/interactive-dashboards/policy-initiatives/2021%2Fdata%2FpolicyInitiatives%2F99993866.
12 https://euraxess.ec.europa.eu/ukraine.
13 This European Research Area for Ukraine ( ERA4Ukraine) portal brings together initiatives at the EU level, per
country and from non -governmental groups ( https://euraxess.ec.europa.eu/euraxess/news/era4ukraine-one-stop-
shop-support-researchers-ukraine).
14 This is being compiled by the International Science Council ( https://council.science/current/news/statements-
international-scientific-community-conflict-ukraine/).
15 https://www.nationalacademies.org/supporting-ukraines-scientists-engineers-and-health-care-workers.

===== PDF_PAGE 44 =====
42 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

16 An example of promoting brain circulation with Ukraine is an initiative of the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research (BMBF), which aims to establish “German-Ukrainian Cores of Excellence” (CoE), i.e. centres for cutting-
edge research in Ukraine. The goal is to establish bilateral research units under the leadership of a top researcher
(preferably of Ukrainian origin) with the involvement of young Ukrainian scientists, and to tra nsfer them to Ukraine,
provided that the security situation is safe. The initiative aims to integrate Ukrainian scientists as a group while
maintaining close ties with Ukrainian partner institutes. In this way, the CoE aim to counteract the current brain d rain
and contribute to the stabilisation and recovery of Ukrainian science. An initial call was published in 2019, and since
2021, 12 German-Ukrainian scientific teams have been developing concepts for establishing future CoE. The best of
these will be fun ded in an implementation phase, which is expected to start in 2024. This BMBF initiative will be
complemented by other (medium -term) co -operation approaches. These aim to enhance research cooperation,
develop local scientific capacities, support reform processes and promote the integration of Ukrainian science into the
European Research Area. A major priority is research co -operation in the field of energy and green hydrogen to
facilitate the rapid (re)construction of a sustainable energy system in Ukraine.
17 Distinguishing R&D from other military expenditures is challenging, partly because public procurement contracts for
defence systems may not allow disentangling sums allocated for R&D purposes from sums spent on actual deliveries.
Spending on classified military R&D projects is also likely to go unreported, leading some OECD countries not to report
any defence R&D figures at all.
18 Synthetic biology is defined as a multidisciplinary field that “integrates systems biology, engineering, computer
science, and other disciplines to achieve the ‘modification of life’ or even the ‘creation of life’ via the redesign of existing
natural systems or the development of new biological components and devices” (Sun et al., 2022[49]).
19 For example, the Nucleic Acid Observatory project ( https://www.naobservatory.org/) aims to build a reliable early
warning system by looking for exponentially increasing nucleic acids in wastewater from travel hubs, using untargeted
metagenomic sequencing.
20 Passive mechanisms such as improved ventilation using HEPA filters (Thompson, 2021[50]) or pathogen-killing lights
are a proven way to reduce transmission. Applying sufficient low-wavelength germicidal lights to inactivate over 90%
of viruses within a second would reliably block the spread of the most contagious known pathogens. Preliminary
studies have shown that low-wavelength germicidal lights are safe for humans and other multicellular organisms while
efficiently killing pathogens like SARS-CoV-2 (Biasin et al., 2021[51]).
21 This is the Collins Dictionary’s “Word of the Year 2022”, which they define as “an extended period of instability and
insecurity” (https://blog.collinsdictionary.com/language-lovers/a-year-of-permacrisis/).

===== PDF_PAGE 45 =====
 43
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Technological leadership has long underpinned the economic prosperity
and security of OECD countries and has typically involved some measure
of protection of technologies from strategic competitors. The growing
ascendancy of China in frontier technologies has ushered in a new era of
intensified strategic competition, particular in critical technologies that will
underpin future economic competitiveness and national security.
Governments are putting in place measures to (i) reduce STI
interdependency risks and restrict international technology flows;
(ii) enhance industrial performance through STI investments; and
(iii) strengthen international STI alliances among like-minded economies.
These measures could disrupt integrated global value chains and the deep
and extensive international science linkages that have built up over the last
30 years. Coupled with a growing emphasis on “shared values” in
technology development and research, they could lead to a “decoupling” of
STI activities at a time when global challenges require global solutions
underpinned by international STI co-operation. A major test for
multilateralism will be to reconcile growing strategic competition with the
need to address global challenges like climate change.
2 Science, technology and innovation
policy in times of strategic
competition

===== PDF_PAGE 46 =====
44 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Key messages
 Technological leadership has long underpinned the economic prosperity and security of
OECD countries. Leadership has inevitably involved some measure of protection of
technologies from strategic competitors, but such efforts today are complicated by the
interdependent and multinational nature of contemporary technological innovation.
 The People’s Republic of China (hereafter China) has accumulated increasingly sophisticated
technological capabilities over the last two decades and is already a market leader in areas like
5G and at the forefront in others, including batteries and photovoltaics. While Chin a is tightly
embedded in global value chains and international science networks, its growing technological
ascendancy, made possible by the stability and opportunity the international order provides, has
ushered in a new era of intensified strategic competition.
 For liberal market economies, China’s ascendancy raises three main areas of concern, each of
which is expected to underpin future economic and national security: (i) rising competition in
critical technologies that are expected to underpin future e conomic competitiveness;
(ii) diverging values and interests between China and liberal market economies, challenging the
existing international rules-based order; and (iii) growing recognition of vulnerability from a lack
of diversification in technology supply-chains.
 As economic and security policy agendas show signs of growing convergence, concepts like
“technology sovereignty” and “strategic autonomy” – which refer to a polity’s capacity to act
strategically and autonomously in an era of intensifying g lobal technology-based competition –
have emerged as frames for science, technology and innovation (STI) policy. This framing could
– and is indeed intended to – disrupt existing technology ecosystems. It could also have
unintended effects – for example, on co-operation in basic science.
 The chapter focuses chiefly on STI-related policies in China, the European Union and the United
States. It shows that countries use, often in combination, three main types of policy intervention
to strengthen their technology sovereignty and strategic autonomy:
1. protection measures, such as export controls, foreign direct investment screening, negative
lists and research security measures, to restrict international technology flows and reduce
supply-chain vulnerabilities
2. promotion measures, such as industri al policies, to strengthen domestic industrial
capabilities and performance and reduce dependencies on foreign suppliers
3. projection measures, such as international STI alliances and technical standards, to
intensify STI co -operation around shared values an d interests and diversify technology
supply chains.
 Policy discussions on interdependency vulnerabilities often cite two prime examples:
semiconductors and critical minerals. The chapter describes how OECD countries and China
are investing heavily in innov ation in both areas, using a mix of protection, promotion and
projection measures to strengthen their relative positions.
 These policies may sacrifice some of the gains derived from specialisation, economies of scale,
and the diffusion of information and k now-how. They could also undermine future co -operation
on global grand challenges. A major test for multilateralism will be to reconcile growing strategic
competition with the need to address collectively global challenges like climate change.

===== PDF_PAGE 47 =====
 45
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Introduction
China’s ascendancy in science and technology has brought many benefits. It has contributed significantly
to the world’s stock of knowledge through its scientific research and has accelerated innovation in
technology areas that are critical to sustainab ility transitions. It is already a market leader in some
technologies, such as 5G, and at the forefront in others, including batteries and wind turbines. These
successes are underpinned by significant growth in R&D expenditures, with China now employing th e
largest number of researchers globally. They have also been made possible by the stability and opportunity
the international order provides.
China’s growing technological capabilities have also ushered in a new era of intensified strategic
competition wi th liberal market economies. Policy concerns stem from growing competition in critical
technologies that are expected to underpin future economic competitiveness and national security,
diverging values and interests between China and liberal market economi es that challenge the existing
international rules -based order, and growing vulnerability from supply -chain interdependencies. These
concerns have prompted technology leaders, such as the European Union and the United States, to seek
greater technological sovereignty and strategic autonomy vis -à-vis China, with the aim of reducing
technology supply-chain vulnerabilities and checking China’s ambition to lead in critical technologies like
artificial intelligence (AI).
The COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine have also shone a spotlight on
global interdependencies, and their benefits and risks. For instance, solutions to the pandemic have drawn
upon extensive international co-operation in science and technology. But the pandemic has also disrupted
global supply chains on goods ranging from face masks to semiconductors, leading to critical shortages in
many OECD countries. The war in Ukraine has exposed disruption vulnerabilities in the supply of Russian
hydrocarbons and Ukrainian grai ns that engendered unprecedented increases in global gas and food
prices, with destabilising knock -on economic effects. Both crises have amplified previously existing
concerns about a heavy reliance on non-diversified supply chains.
To reduce their mutual technology dependencies, China, the European Union and the United States –
which between them account for most of the world’s advanced science and technology developments and
production1 – have recently introduced initiatives to strengthen domestic STI capabilities and reduce
international technology dependencies. Technology -fuelled industrial policy, underpinned in part by
COVID-19 recovery investments, has become newly fashionable, combining security concerns with
economic renewal and the need for green t ransitions. This is most visible in semiconductors, but also
extends to other technology fields.
Such policy efforts to reduce technology dependencies could disrupt integrated global value chains, and
the deep and extensive international science linkages that have built up over the last 30 years. Coupled
with a growing emphasis on “shared values” in technology development and research, these developments
could lead to a “decoupling” of STI activities, particularly between the European Union and the
United States on the one hand, and China on the other. This is at a time when global challenges, notably
climate change, require global solutions underpinned by international STI co -operation. China, the
European Union and the United States are each establishing various overlapping and sometimes
competing international fora and platforms to co -operate on tech nology development, governance and
diffusion. However, these are not global, and a major test for multilateralism will be to reconcile growing
strategic competition with the need for international co-operation to address global challenges.
The chapter is based on a literature review of some of the main trends and policy responses related to
growing strategic competition. It begins with a brief overview of strategic competition and its growing

===== PDF_PAGE 48 =====
46 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

influence on STI policy. The increasing “securitisation”2 of STI is part of a policy push for greater strategic
autonomy, whose meaning remains contested, but which broadly aims to (i) reduce STI interdependency
risks and restrict international technology flows; (ii) enhance industrial performance through
STI investments; and (iii) strengthen international STI alliances among like -minded economies. The
chapter includes sections discussing each of these policy goals. This is followed by a section that describes
how China, the European Union and the United States are pursu ing these policy goals to reduce their
vulnerabilities in semiconductors and critical minerals. A final section draws some lessons and presents a
brief outlook for STI policy in times of strategic competition.
Strategic autonomy in research and innovation
Technology is central to today’s geopolitical competition (The White House, 2022 [1]), and technological
leadership has long underpinned the economic prosperity and security of OECD countries. Leadership has
inevitably involved some measure of protection of technologies – particularly military technologies, but also
civilian ones with dual -use potential – from strategic competitors. These efforts are complicated by the
interdependent and multinational na ture of contemporary technological innovation, with R&D processes
for developing new technology more collaborative and globally distributed than in the past. This means
many technologies have diverse origins and rely heavily on other technologies with owne rs, users and
stakeholders in multiple countries. Many also have dual -use potential (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, 2022[2]).
At the same time, economic and security thinkin g are converging, with countries increasingly concerned
about vulnerabilities arising from excessive dependence on others. This has led to increasing government
intervention in the economy – particularly in China – and new policy measures to enhance self-sufficiency
and resilience. As a rising economic power, China is faced with an imperative to acquire and develop
technologies to climb the global value chain and escape the middle-income trap.3 China has implemented
comprehensive industrial policy measures to support “national champions” and engaged in overseas
acquisitions to bridge the technological gap (Wigell et al., 2022 [3]). However, these are seen by liberal
market economies as distortions to the competitive playing field that undermine the rules and norms of the
global economy (Goodman and Robert, 2021[4]).
Supply-chain vulnerabilities and geopolitical tensions related to China’s ascendancy h ave led to growing
policy interest in “technology sovereignty”, which refers to a polity’s capacity to act strategically and
autonomously in an era of intensifying global technology-based competition (Edler et al., 2021[5]). A related
concept, “strategic autonomy”, is broader and refers to a polity’s capacity to act independently in
strategically important policy areas. It does not imply isolation or decoupling from the rest of the world, but
rather describes a polity’s capacity to develop and manage international relations independently. It is tied
to technology sovereignty, insofar as the latter creates opportunities to compete at technological frontiers,
with positive impacts on the polity’s ability t o influence global affairs (Crespi et al., 2021[6]), (March and
Schieferdecker, 2021 [7]). Countries’ capacity to successfully develop, integrate and use emerging and
disruptive technologies in military applications is a traditional measure of their strategic autonomy (Soare
and Pothier, 2021 [8]), but this capacity also applies to many commercia l technologies, particularly those
with dual-use potential.
This intensified era of geopolitical competition is putting pressure on the rules and institutions that govern
the international economy. In its latest national security strategy (The White House, 2022 [1]), the United
States government notes challenges to the post-Second World War rules-based system. These rules have
always been subject to dynamic change, driven by the evolving interests of po werful countries and
changing global norms (Edler et al., 2021[5]). As China strives for technological leadership, it also seeks to
define what these new “rules of the road” should look like. This make s the technological race between
China and liberal market economies a competition between different systems and values (Soare and

===== PDF_PAGE 49 =====
 47
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Pothier, 2021[8]), (Edler et al., 2021[5]). This difference lies at the core of strategic competition, since the
nature of different political systems determines how technologies are developed and used, and their
success will define the broader appeal of these systems in the longer term (Schmidt et al., 2022[9]).
Three types of policy intervention for strengthening strategic autonomy
The policy literature (e.g. (Helwig, Sinkkonen and Sinkkonen, 2021[10]; March and Schieferdecker, 2021[7];
Goodman and Robert, 2021 [4])) identifies three main types of policy intervention for strengthening
technology sovereignty and strategic autonomy – i.e. protection, promotion and projection, sometimes
referred to as the “3Ps” (Figure 2.1):
1. protection: restricting technology flows and reducing dependency risks , e.g. through regulatory
policies like export controls, supply-chain diversification measures, etc.
2. promotion: enhancing domestic innovation capabilities and performance , e.g. through holistic
innovation policies, mission-oriented innovation policies, national industrial strategies, etc.
3. projection: extending and deepening international STI linkages , e.g. through international
technology alliances, active participation in international standards setting bodies, etc.
The challenge facing policy makers is to strike an appropriate balance between these types of policy
intervention in their country context. For example, much of the current technology sovereignty debate in
the United States centres on the balance between protection and promotion measures, with advocates of
a more active industrial policy (promotion) highlighting its centrality for meeting growing technology
competition from China. In practice, single policy initiatives, such as national industrial policies, can
incorporate elements of all three types of policy intervention. Along these lines, the European Commission
(European Commission, 2021 [11]) has signalled the need for a coherent mix of industrial, research and
trade policies that can facilitate partnership and collaboration with like -minded countries in pursuit of
strategic autonomy. These policy areas are often quite independent of one another, and their orchestration
presents c o-ordination and governance challenges for policy makers (Edler et al., 2021 [5]), (Araya and
Mavinkurve, 2022 [12]). Ultimately, no single formula exists, and an appropriate policy mix will vary
depending on countries, technology areas and industrial sectors. This calls for a targeted, risk
management-based approach informed by assessments of threats, risks and opportunities.
Figure 2.1. Three types of policy intervention to strengthen technological strategic autonomy

The sections that follow cover each of these types of policy intervention. They explore the issues at stake
and point to policy initia tives from China, the European Union and the United States, which together

===== PDF_PAGE 50 =====
48 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

account for most of the world’s science and innovation activities. Specific policy initiatives often combine
different types of intervention, and this is highlighted throughout. Table 2.1 lists the main policy initiatives
covered. To provide some context, the following section first presents a few selected headline indicators
on the science and innovation performance of China, the European Union and the United States.
Table 2.1. Selected recent policy initiatives that incorporate protection, promotion or projection
China Made in China 2025; 14th Five-Year Plan; Dual Circulation Strategy; Military-Civil Fusion;
Government Guidance Funds; China Standards 2035; Belt and Road Initiative
European Union NextGenerationEU; New Industrial Strategy for Europe; New European Innovation Agenda;
Important Projects of Common European Interest; Chips Act for Europe; EU-US Trade and
Technology Council
United States CHIPS and Science Act; Inflation Reduction Act; Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act; Quad;
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity; Group of Seven (G7) Partnership for Global
Infrastructure and Investment
Note: The table makes no claim to comprehensiveness, and the policy initiatives listed are limited to examples covered in later sections of this
chapter. Note that many of these initiatives cover more than one type of policy intervention (protection, promotion and projection).
How do China, the European Union and the United States compare? Some selected
headline indicators
The United States remains the largest absolute spender on R&D in the world, followed by China, which
overtook the European Union in 2014 ( Figure 2.2). China’s R&D intensity grew from 1.71% in 2010 to
2.45% in 2021. This exceeds the R&D intensity of the European Union (2.15%,) but is still somewhat below
the level of the United States (3.46%).
Figure 2.2. Gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD), selected economies, 2000-21
US dollar (USD) billion in constant purchasing power parity (PPP) prices

Source: OECD R&D statistics, February 2023. See OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators, http://oe.cd/msti, for most up -to-date
indicators (accessed on 8 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/r09mdp
China
Germany
EU(27)
France
Japan
Korea
United States
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
China Germany EU(27) France Japan Korea United States
USD PPP, billion constant prices

===== PDF_PAGE 51 =====
 49
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 2.3 shows the absolute R&D expenditures of China, the European Union and the United States
over the last two decades. The scale of China’s expenditures today suggest it has critical mass to innovate
at the frontier. The business sector accounts for the largest expenditures on R&D in all three areas by far,
though the proportion has increased in China in recent decades, from 60.0% in 2000 to 76.6% in 2020.
The government sector is the second -largest R&D performer in China, accounting for 15.7% of GERD in
2020, although this is a significant decline compared to 20 years earlier, when it accounted for 31.5%. The
higher education sector is the smallest, accounting for just 7.7% of GERD in 2020, a proportion largely
unchanged from 20 years earlier (8.6%). This situation is somewhat reversed in the European Union and
the United States, where the higher education sector is more prominent than the government sector, with
a growing share of GERD over the last 20 years.
Figure 2.3 also shows that China had 2.28 million researchers in 2020 – the largest number of researchers
in the world, compared to 1.89 million in the European Union and 1.59 million in the United States.4 While
researcher numbers have grown markedly in all three areas over the last two decades, they have more
than tripled in China over the past 20 years, marking the greatest expansion compared to other countries.
To put this into perspective, China still had only 3.0 researchers per 1 000 in total employment in 2020,
which is around one-third of the European Union level, suggesting considerable room for further expansion.
Figure 2.3. R&D expenditures by sector and total full-time employed (FTE) researchers
USD billion in 2015 PPP prices and 1 000 FTE

Note: 2020 R&D expenditure data are provisional for the United States, and estimated for China and the EU27; 2020 researchers’ data for the
United States corresponds to 2019.
Source: OECD R&D statistics, September 2022. See OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators Database, http://oe.cd/msti, for most up-
to-date OECD indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/2mxj6f
China’s increases in R&D expenditures and personnel have translated into a higher volume and citation
impact of scientific publications. Figure 2.4 shows that China produced more scientific publications in 2020
than either the European Union or the United States. It also produced more top-cited scientific publications
in 2020. The European Union also increased its volumes of scientific publications and the number of top -

===== PDF_PAGE 52 =====
50 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

cited, though by a smaller margin than China. Increases in the United States were much smaller, although
starting from a high level of performance.
Turning to patents, China accounted for 13% of IP5 patent families5 in 2017-19 compared to just 1% in
1998-2000, surpassing Germany as the third -largest patenting country according to this measure
(Figure 2.5). Over the same period, the proportion of IP5 patent families originating in the United States
fell from 26% to 19%. Japan remains the top patenting country, accounting for 26% of IP5 patent fami lies
in 2017-19, a proportion that is largely unchanged from 1998 -2000, when it accounted for 28%. As the
preferred measure of internationalisation of innovative activities, inventive performance and diffusion of
knowledge, the data on IP5 patent families suggest that China has accumulated increasingly sophisticated
technological capabilities over the last two decades thanks to its R&D investments.
Figure 2.4. Trends in volume and citation impact of scientific publications, selected economies

Note: Peer-reviewed scientific publications convey the research findings of scientists worldwide. Subsequent citations by other authors provide
an indirect but objective source of information about the quality of research outputs, as implied by their use by th e scientific community itself.
Despite limitations, such as that citations do not take into account the use of the scientific information by inventors or practitioners who are less
likely to publish in peer -reviewed journals, they provide one of the availa ble quality adjustments to raw counts of documents. Their relevance
can be considered to be higher in the context of the higher education sector. The indicator of scientific excellence indicate s the amount (in %)
of a unit’s scientific output that is part of the set of the 10% most -cited papers within their respective scientific fields (see
https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/Bibliometrics-Compendium.pdf).
Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 6.2022, September 2022.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/0akyvp
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
A. China
Thousand
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
B. EU (27)
Thousand Thousand
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
C. United States
ThousandThousand Thousand

===== PDF_PAGE 53 =====
 51
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 2.5. Distribution of IP5 patent families for selected countries and the rest of the world
Percentage of IP5 patent families originating in the different countries and regions that make up the total

Note: Data refer to families of patent applications filed within the Five IP offices (IP5), by earliest filing date, according to the applicant's location.
Source: OECD, STI Micro-data Lab: Intellectual Property Database, http://oe.cd/ipstats (accessed 9 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/oucrwx
Protection: Restricting knowledge flows and reducing risks from
interdependency
The first type of strategic autonomy policy intervention concerns protection, for example, in the form of
barriers to open knowledge and technology flows wh ere there is growing recognition of risks to national
security. The COVID -19 crisis and Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine have also brought
interdependency risks to the fore, raising questions about the resilience of a global production model
grounded on international fragmentation and just -in-time logistics. A shift in the balance between the
security of supply and efficiency considerations could lead to a reconfiguration of supply chains and the
use of suppliers at less distant locations. This re configuration could affect the sourcing of high -tech
products and components, particularly where there are vulnerabilities from key suppliers based in countries
with different geopolitical priorities (OECD, 2022[13]).
The growing research security agenda outlined in Chapter 1 shows that these concerns extend to basic
research, which has traditionally fallen outside of formal controls. International science collaboration has
blossomed in the last 20 years, particularly b etween OECD countries and China. Yet there exists a real
possibility that rising geopolitical tensions could limit these linkages and lead to a decline in international
science co-operation in the future.
This section is divided into two parts. The first p rovides a few selected headline indicators to show the
growth and extent of interdependencies between economies, particularly China, the European Union and
the United States. The second part looks more closely at recent policy trends that aim to reduce
vulnerabilities from interdependencies and considers what they could mean for future research and
innovation activities.
Japan
28%
Rest of the World
26%
United States
26%
China
1%
Germany
15%
Korea
4%
A. 1998-2000
Japan
26%
Rest of the World
25%
United States
19%
China
13%
Germany
9%
Korea
9%
B. 2017-2019

===== PDF_PAGE 54 =====
52 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Getting a measure of STI interdependency
Since the end of the Cold War, several types of STI linkages have deepened and expanded. These include
international science collaboration, international mobility of scientists and engineers, and global value
chains in high R&D-intensive economic activities, as briefly described below.
International science collaboration
Science depends on the global knowledge commons for progress, and around one -fifth of scientific
publications are co-authored internationally. As China’s scientific capabilities have grown in recent years,
it has developed strong research links with OECD countries. Data on collaboratio n based on scientific
publications – calculated using whole counts of internationally co -authored documents – shows
international collaboration between China and the United States grew rapidly over the last few decades
(Figure 2.6). In fact, between 2017 -19, US co-authorship with China was more prevalent than with the
United Kingdom. This has since fallen quite sharply, allegedly owing to pandemic trave l restrictions and
denial of visas that restricted Chinese students and scholars from travelling overseas (Wagner and Cai,
2022[14]). Most of the decline – which started in 2020 and accelerated in 2021 – is in engineering and
natural sciences fields, which account for the bulk of bilateral research collaboration between China and
the United States ( Figure 2.7). In the meantime, collaboration in other research fields, such as life and
health sciences and social sciences and humanities, continued to grow over the same period. These
patterns could be early signs of China -US disengagement from bilateral collaboration in research fields
that are critical to strategic competition. They could also signal that bilateral collaboration in other areas,
such as medicine and environmental sciences, where strategic competition is less prominent, could
continue to grow.
Figure 2.6. Bilateral collaboration intensity trends in scientific publications, 1996-2021

Note: The indicator of bilateral collaboration intensity between two economies is calculated by dividing the n umber of scientific publications by
authors with affiliations in both economies (whole counts) by the square root of the product of the publications for each of the two economies
(whole counts). This indicator is therefore normalised for publication output. Publications refer to all citable publications, namely, articles, reviews
and conference proceedings.
Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 6.2022, February 2023
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/sqxp5w

0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0.14
 0.16
 0.18
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
 China-United Kingdom China-EU (27) EU (27)-United States
 EU (27)-United Kingdom United States-China United States-United Kingdom

===== PDF_PAGE 55 =====
 53
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 2.7. Top 15 fields of collaboration between the United States and China

Note: Collaboration between China and the United States is defined by the number of co -authored publications between both countries (whole
counts). Publications refer to all citable publications, that is articles, reviews and conference proceedings. The top -15 in the chart corresponds
to those fields where more than 2 000 US-China co-authorship publications were recorded in 2018 (whole counts). Panel A shows the number
of 2018 collaborations, in absolute terms. Panel B shows the changes in collaborations for each year versus the previous year, as a percentage
of 2018 collaborations.
Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 6.2022, February 2023.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/apywgj
Foreign-born human resources for science and technology
Some of the largest research per formers in OECD countries rely heavily on foreign -born PhDs and
postdocs to perform their R&D. In the United States, for example, foreign-born workers comprised 19% of
the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce in 2019, up from 1 7% in 2010;
45% of workers in science and engineering occupations at the doctorate level were foreign -born, with the
highest shares among computer and mathematical scientists. Around half of foreign -born workers in the
United States whose highest degree was in a science and engineering field are from Asia, with India (22%)
and China (11%) as the leading birthplaces (National Science Board, 2022 [15]). Indeed, China and India
make up almost half of foreig n-born students in the United States ( Figure 2.8). Data on net flows of
scientific authors show recent declines in the United States, becoming a net outflow in 2021 ( Figure 2.9).
Net inflows of scientific authors into China mirror these declines to some extent, which points to Chinese
scientists returning from the United States. The European Union’s growing attractiveness for scientific
authors is partly a result of Brexit, with EU scientists returning from the United Kingdom.
 Coauthorship publications, whole counts, 2018
A. Number of United-States-China collaborations B. Collaboration changes
Percentage change in year relative to 2018 baseline
-50 -25 0 25 50
Social Sciences
Medicine
Immunology and Microbiology
Agricultural and Biological Sciences
Environmental Science
Earth and Planetary Sciences
Biochemistry, Genetics
and Molecular Biology
Physics and Astronomy
Engineering
Mathematics
Energy
Computer Science
Chemistry
Chemical Engineering
Materials Science
2019 2020 2021
% 0 4 000 8 000 12 000
Social Sciences
Medicine
Immunology and Microbiology
Agricultural and Biological Sciences
Environmental Science
Earth and Planetary Sciences
Biochemistry, Genetics
and Molecular Biology
Physics and Astronomy
Engineering
Mathematics
Energy
Computer Science
Chemistry
Chemical Engineering
Materials Science

===== PDF_PAGE 56 =====
54 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 2.8. Foreign-born origin studying in the US tertiary education system
Percentage of foreign-born students from different countries and regions that make up the total

Source: (OECD, 2023[16]) (accessed 11 October 2022).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/in5r6l
Figure 2.9. Net flows of scientific authors, top publishing countries, 2015 and 2021
Entries minus exits realised in the reference year

Note: Estimates are based on differences between annual fractional inflows and outflows of scient ific authors for the reference economy, as
indicated by a change in the main affiliation of a given author with a Scopus ID over the author’s indexed publication span. An inflow is computed
for year t and economy c if an author who was previously affiliate d to another economy is first seen to be affiliated to an institution in that
economy and year. Likewise, an outflow is recorded when an author who was affiliated to c in a previous period is first observed to be affiliated
in a different economy in year t. In the case of affiliations in more than one economy, a fractional counts approach is used. In the case of multiple
publications per author in a given year, the last publication in any given year is used as reference, while others are ignored.
Source: OECD calculations based on Scopus Custom Data, Elsevier, Version 6.2022, September 2022.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/6a97ow

A. 2013 B. 2020
Africa 5%
Europe 8%
Oceania 1%
Northern
America 4%Latin
America
and the
Caribbean
8%
China
30%
India
10%
Korea
9%
Other Asia
25%
Africa 5% Europe 7%
Oceania 1%
Northern
America 3%
Latin
America
and the
Caribbean
8%
China
36%
India
13%
Korea
5%
Other Asia
22%
-5 000
-4 000
-3 000
-2 000
-1 000
 0
1 000
2 000
3 000
4 000
2021 2015

===== PDF_PAGE 57 =====
 55
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Global value chains in high R&D-intensive sectors
Changes in recent decades in the major im porters6 of intermediate products in high and medium -high
R&D-intensive economic activities highlight how economies have become increasingly interconnected in
global value chains. At the beginning of the 21 st century, the United States was the largest impo rter of
intermediate products in high and medium -high R&D-intensive economic activities, with Japan its most
significant supplier. Twenty years later, China has become the largest importer (and exporter) of such
intermediate products. It is also the main s upplier to its neighbouring economies (Japan, Korea and
Chinese Taipei) and the second -largest supplier to the United States, after Mexico ( Figure 2.10). These
interdependencies would make potential decoupling between China and OECD countries highly disruptive
and costly.
Figure 2.10. Flows of intermediate products in high and medium-high R&D-intensive economic
activities, selected economies
Import flows, in USD current prices

Note: Intermediate products in high and medium -high R&D-intensive economic activities are defined in https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-
and-technology/oecd-taxonomy-of-economic-activities-based-on-r-d-intensity_5jlv73sqqp8r-en. They include products from the following
industrial International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities, Fourth version (ISIC 4) sectors: D20 Chemicals and chemical
products; D21 Basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations; D26 Computer, electronic and optical products; D252 Weapons
and ammunition; D27 Electrical equipment; D28 Machinery and equipment n.e.c.; D29 Motor vehicles, trailers and semi -trailers; D302A9
Railroad equipment and transport equipment n.e.c.; D303 Air and spacecraft and related machinery; D304 Military fighting vehicles; D325
Medical and dental instruments and supplies. Panel B: 2021 data for Korea corresponds to 2020. This selection of imports flow s represented
20 % of the World imports of intermediate products in high and medium-high R&D-intensive economic activities in 2021.
Source: (OECD, 2023[17]) (accessed 6 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/21wj98
Reconfiguring interdependencies?
Managing international co-operation in science
The figures on international scientific collaboration illustrate that researchers from different countries work
together regardless of governments’ ideological positions. Scientific discovery occurs in an interconnected
ecosystem that draws upon collective intellect, know -how, talent, financial resources and infrastructure
A. 2000 B. 2021

===== PDF_PAGE 58 =====
56 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

from around the world. The impressive growth in China’s scientific capabilities over the last two decades
make it an attractive partner for many researchers in OECD countries, and vice versa. Furthermore, global
challenges like the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change and other complex socio-economic issues cannot
be tackled without international research collaboration (OECD, 2022[18]).
At the same time, it is likely that global research networks have yet to internalise fully the implications of
growing technological sovereignty, particularly in research areas with dual -use potential. Declin ing
collaboration between China and the United States in natural sciences and engineering since 2020 could
accelerate (Figure 2.7). While much uncertainty remains, excessively risk -averse policies could trigger a
more abrupt and extensive intellectual decoupling and disengagement. The policy challenge for OECD
member countries is to enable their researchers to continue robust and principled acade mic engagement
while protecting their interests and standing up for their values in a complex geopolitical environment (see
Chapter 1). This will not be easy, and managing the risks and benefits of internationalisation will need to
be informed by frequent data-driven mapping of research relationships to determine which areas are
essential for more open science, and which are not (Joseph et al., 2022[19]). Researchers will also need to
diversify their international linkages, drawing on support from research -funding agencies, which could do
more to deepen their contacts with a wider range of partner organisations globally (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, 2022[20]).
Securitising high-tech commercial flows
The rapid pace of product and financial market integration at the global level, combined with the relentless
pursuit of efficiency gains through global supply chains, have brought economic benefits but also exposed
vulnerabilities to disruption, as shown during the COVID -19 pandemic. Increasing complexity has
introduced logistical fragility into global supply chains, with mounting geopolitical tensions raising the risk
of coercion to extract gains from partner countries elsewhere in the chain (OECD, 2021[21]).
As Figure 2.10 shows, China’s grow th and integration into the world economy has seen manufacturing
firms in OECD countries use China increasingly as a source of high -tech inputs and a platform for final
assembly. This has caused growing technological interdependency between China and OECD economies
(e.g. in semiconductors), but also raised concerns about supply -chain vulnerabilities in critical
technologies. In parallel, China has accumulated increasingly sophisticated technological capabilities and
is already a market leader in some areas – such as 5G – and at the forefront in others, including AI, drones
and other technologies with potential military applications (Goodman and Robert, 2021[4]).
These developments have raised national security concerns among OECD countries, leading to a growing
“securitisation” of high-tech commercial flows. This is evidenced in the increasing use of barriers to direct
market access, such as negative lists, export controls 7 and tightened foreign direct in vestment (FDI)
screening, and indirect barriers, like national standards. OECD economies are also looking at options to
diversify supply chains, making them more resilient and less vulnerable to disruptions and shocks. This
could entail boosting global cap acities to produce multiple reliable and sustainable sources of materials
and inputs, intermediate goods and finished goods in priority sectors, as well as enhance logistics
infrastructure capacity (US Department of State, 2022[22]).
Whether these new arrangements will end up being as efficient as current ones is an open question, but
they could see distinct and decoupled technology ecosystems emerge in China and liberal market
economies (European Chamber of Commerce in China and Mercator Institute for China Studies, 2021[23]).8
The resulting re-division of the world into blocs separated by barriers will likely sacrifice some of the gains
from specialisation, economies of scale, and the diffusion of information and know-how (OECD, 2022[13]).9
It will also lead to competition that may undermine future co -operation on global grand challenges, and
could signal the weakening of any notion of economic interdependency acting as a bulwark against future
conflict.

===== PDF_PAGE 59 =====
 57
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Promotion: Enhancing industrial performance through STI investments
The second type of strategic autonomy policy intervention concerns promotion – notably in the form of
holistic industrial policy, in which STI policy plays a prominent part. A revival of industrial policy has been
the subject of active debate for more than a decade (e.g. (Rodrik, 2014[24]; Warwick, 2013 [25]; Criscuolo
et al., 2022[26])), particularly in light of the need for rapid susta inability transitions and the competitiveness
threat posed by China’s industrial policies. While the industrial and innovation policy mix in most
OECD economies remains largely focused on R&D, tax incentives and earlier -stage investment support,
there has been a resurgence in targeted interventions that are rationalised by geopolitical tensions, supply-
chain concerns and various “green” targets (DiPippo, Mazzocco and Kennedy, 2022 [27])10.
Decarbonisation, in particular, calls for what has been termed an “industrial revolution against a deadline”,
where relying on price signals alone may mean the technological change needed to reach net -zero
happens too late (Tagliapietra and Veugelers, 2020[28]) (see Chapter 3).
Most economists accept there exist sound theoretical rationales for industrial policies but are sceptical of
governments’ abilities to achieve well -targeted, timely and effective interventions in practice, mostly on
account of informational asymmetries between the public and private sectors, and the political risks of
policy capture by powerful insiders and special interests. Rodrik (2014[24]) argues that these hurdles are
not insurmountable and in fact apply to most areas of government policy. Rather, the debate concerns the
design of industrial policies, as well as the strong need for their evaluation and regular reassessment
(Warwick, 2013[25]).
In this regard, the OECD has outlined a framework for formulating industrial policy mixes that emphasises
the potential complementarities between instruments along several lines (Criscuolo et al., 2022 [29];
Criscuolo et al., 2022[26]). These include the distinction between horizontal and targeted policies, demand-
pull and supply -push instruments, and policies that improve firm performance and those that affect the
framework conditions for innovation. Chapter 3 outlines a similarly broad research and innovation
ecosystem framework, focusing on holistic STI policies for promoting sustainability transitions. Mission -
oriented innovation policies (MOIPs) inco rporate a similar ecosystem perspective, but with a narrower
focus on fulfilling a specific mission, such as achieving net -zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by
2050. MOIPs are the subject of Chapter 5. This section briefly outlines the industrial strateg ies and some
of their main policy instruments in China, the European Union and the United States.
China’s “indigenous innovation” drive
Despite its remarkable economic success, China is still at risk of being caught in the middle -income trap.
To escape this prospect, the Chinese government has launched several high-level initiatives over the years
to promote technology development and the upgrading of its manufacturing base. 11 The “indigenous
innovation” campaign launched in 2006 as part of the Guidelines on National Medium - and Long-term
Programme for Science and Technology Development (2006 -20) highlighted China’s resolve to catch up
with advanced industrialised nations and reflected a renewed focus on state intervention in technology
development (Arcesati, Hors and Schwaag Serger, 2021 [30]). The guidelines sought to support a
comprehensive system of implementation by co -ordinating policies on R&D investment, tax incentives,
financial support, public pro curement, intellectual property and education (OECD, 2017 [31]). Another
watershed moment came in 2015 with the launch of the Made in China 2025 industrial policy, which shifted
the focus from catching up to leapfrogging OECD countries at the innovation frontier, with a view to turning
China into an STI “superpower” by 2049.
Since then, China has made rapid progress towards becoming a global leader in some technology areas.
It has already forged ahead in fields such as 5G networks, and secured a strong position in areas like AI
and electric-vehicle batteries (Zenglein and Holzmann, 2019[32]). It invests heavily in research, and its R&D
intensity has already surpassed that of the EU27 (see Figure 2.2). The government also deploys some

===== PDF_PAGE 60 =====
58 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

unique industrial policy instruments, especially government guidance funds, the state -owned financial
sector, non-financial state-owned enterprises and the party -state’s political gu idance of private firms, to
develop domestic technological capabilities.12 As a whole, this industrial policy support means that China
spends far more on supporting its industries than any other economy, an amount estimated at more than
twice the level of the United States in dollar terms in 2019 (DiPippo, Mazzocco and Kennedy, 2022[27]).
Rising tensions with the United States in recent years have caused China’s perspective on globalisation
and interdependence to shift, with “technology security” emerging as a core dimension of the Chinese
government’s all-encompassing national security concept (Arcesati, Hors and Schwaag Serger, 2021 [30]).
Faced with an increasingly turbulent and unpredictable external environment, the Chinese government is
looking to innovate its way out of many of the challenges it faces, and extols the importance of indigenous
innovation as crucial to becoming self -reliant (China Power Team, 2021 [33]). The 14th Five -Year Plan for
National and Economic Social Development 2021-25) and its underpinning Dual Circulation Strategy, both
of which are described below, aim to achieve se lf-sufficiency in core technologies and reduce China’s
reliance on foreign technologies such as advanced semiconductors, where it has critical dependencies.
The most recent initiatives covered in this chapter are Made in China 2025, the 14 th Five-Year Plan, the
Dual Circulation Strategy and Military-Civil Fusion, all briefly outlined in Box 2.1. These important initiatives
are both highly general and concise, setting key goals, directions, priorities and frameworks. They are
usually followed by more detail ed and implementation -oriented action plans utilising tools and measures
such as government investments, R&D programmes, demonstration projects, tax incentives, financing
support and human-resource policies (OECD, 2017[31]). In fact, China has a very comprehensive set of STI
planning documents from high-level strategies to the sectoral level, and many are replicated at the province
level. China’s government uses a sophisticated “strategic intelligence” system to monitor and scan
domestic and foreign STI policies, strategies, inputs and outputs, and provides strategic advice to decision
makers. The system draws on extensive databases managed by the Institute of Scientific and Technical
Information of China, a research ins titute under the Ministry of Science and Innovation. The institute
gathers and disseminates data covering domestic patents, talents, and the achievements of major science
and technology -funding programmes. It also gathers and disseminates “open -source” int elligence on
foreign STI sources, trends and achievements, promoting technology transfer from foreign sources to
national industries (Center for Security and Emerging Technology, 2021[34]; Arcesati, Hors and Schwaag
Serger, 2021[30]).
Box 2.1. Selected Chinese industrial policy initiatives
Made in China 2025
Launched in 2015, Made in China 2025 was an important milestone in Chinese STI policy as the first
of a series of national ten-year strategic initiatives covering the long-term comprehensive development
of China’s manufacturing industry (OECD, 2017[31]). Its aim is to build a world-class innovation system
and achieve global dominance in key technologies, to achieve major breakthroughs over the next
decades (Zenglein and Holzmann, 2019[32]). While Made in China 2025 called for a broader upscaling
of manufacturing capabilities, it prioritised progress in ten key industries.1 It identified nine paths for
achieving its ambition, including making various enhancements to C hinese innovation capabilities,
promoting digitalisation, and targeting priority technologies and products. Within these nine paths, it
further identified eight directions for implementation related to system reform, fair market competition,
finance, tax, human resources, SMEs, international openness and co -ordination mechanisms. A
technology roadmap for priority technologies and products was also published in 2015, and later
updated (OECD, 2017[31]).

===== PDF_PAGE 61 =====
 59
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

14th Five-Year Plan (2021-25)
While China’s five -year plans are wide -ranging, its 14th Five -Year Plan for National Economic and
Social Development places technology and innovation at the heart of China’s modernisation drive
(Arcesati, Hors and Schwaag Serger, 2021 [30]). It echoes many of the ambitions outlined in Made in
China 2025, emphasising the goal of reducing China’s reliance on foreign technology as quickly as
possible through industrial modernisation and domesti c technological innovation efforts, to become
ultimately a global leader in strategic emerging industries, frontier technology and basic science
(Grünberg and Brussee, 2021[35]). The 14th Five-Year Plan includes a commitment to formulating and
implementing strategic scientific plans and projects related to national security and economic
development, focusing on seven areas. It promises to establish a number of national laboratories and
to support the de velopment of new types of research universities and institutes. It also commits to
boosting spending on basic research, an area where China has historically lagged (China Power Team,
2021[33]). It aims to develop and implement a ten-year action plan for basic research, acknowledging its
role in the development of indigenous breakthroughs in key science and technology fields. The plan
incorporates innovation indicators, including a commitment to increas ing R&D expenditures by 7% per
year, almost doubling innovation patents over the plan’s five -year period, and increasing the digital
economy’s share of GDP to 10% by 2025 (Xinhua News Agency, 2021[36]). For the first time, the Five -
Year Plan also includes a medium-term outlook (until 2035).
Dual Circulation Strategy
The Dual Circulation Strategy is China’s overarching plan for economic development and global
integration. Its name derives from the dual goals of strengthening innovation capabilities domestically
(via ”internal circulation”) while maintaining global ties (via ”external circulation”) (Bilgin and Loh,
2021[37]). It is enshrined in the 14th Five -Year Plan and seeks to solve China’s core development
challenges in the next decades, ranging from domestic issues (such as insufficient innovation capacity,
income disparity and environmental degradation) to external risks (such as growing prote ctionism and
technological dependence) (Brown, Gunter and Zenglein, 2021 [38]). The strategy aims to do this by (i)
reducing external demand as a driver of economic growth, by boosting domestic consumpt ion; (ii)
positioning China as a global manufacturing powerhouse in high value -added products; (iii) attaining
higher levels of self -sufficiency in key areas, by enhancing innovation; and (iv) ensuring access to
critical inputs, by diversifying supply chains and funnelling investment into specific sectors (China Power
Team, 2021[33]). As China becomes more self-reliant through this strategy, it could provide the grounds
for greater decoupling. On the o ther hand, the Dual Circulation Strategy does not aim for complete
autarky, and foreign technology and capital are viewed as vital for China to become more self-sufficient
and upgrade its economic structure (Bilgin and Loh, 2021[37]).
Military-Civil Fusion
Inspired in part by the success of the United States in developing productive linkages between its civil
and defence technology ecosystems, China has been pursuing a Military-Civil Fusion initiative for
several years. This was subsequently mainstreamed in 2018 as part of its 13th Five -Year Plan. The
initiative aims to create and exploit synergies between economic development and military
modernisation, and encourages defence and commercial firms to c ollaborate and synchronise their
efforts by sharing talent, resources and innovations. It has expansive ambitions, from enhancing co -
operation in big data infrastructures to mobilising national defence (Kania and Laskai, 2021[39]).
1. The key industries are as follows: Information Technology (AI, IoT, smart appliances); Robotics (AI, machine learning); Gr een Energy
and green vehicles (energy efficiency, electric vehicles); Aerospace equipment; Ocean Engineering and high-tech ships; Railway equipment;
Power equipment; New materials; Medicine and medical devices; and Agriculture machinery.

===== PDF_PAGE 62 =====
60 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The European Union’s “open strategic autonomy” agenda
While expenditures by the European Commission on STI and industry policies are a fraction of those of
EU Member States, they have a strong influence on the direction of European policies. EU policy has
played a central part in promoting the concept of “open strategic autonomy” in Europe as part of the green
and digital ”twin transitions” agenda. EU Member States have different views on the meaning and
implications of strategic autonomy. Some prefer a European industrial policy that targets specific sectors,
while others prefer more horizontal measures that create the conditions for innovation (Lewander et al.,
2021[40]). On the eve of the COVID -19 pandemic, the European Commission presented a new industr ial
strategy to support the twin green and digital transitions, make EU industry more competitive globally, and
enhance Europe’s open strategic autonomy (European Commission, 2020 [41]). It updated the strategy in
2021 to reflect lessons from the pandemic, notably the need for a better understanding of Europe’s
strategic dependencies, how they may develop in the future and the extent to which they could lead to
vulnerabilities. The industrial strategy pr oposed strengthening and diversifying external trade on the one
hand, and strengthening Europe’s innovation capacity in key strategic areas on the other, using tools such
as Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEIs) (see Box 2.2), industrial alliances, and
funding from Horizon Europe and the European Defence Fund (EDF) (European Commission, 2021[11]).
In response to the COVID -19 pandemic, the European Union launched the NextGenerationEU f und in
2020, worth EUR 750 billion (euros) (in 2018 prices). The purpose of the fund is to mitigate the economic
and social impact of the pandemic, and make European economies and societies more sustainable,
resilient and better prepared for the challenges and opportunities of the green and digital transitions. The
Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF) is the key instrument at the heart of NextGenerationEU. The
European Union views the RRF as a unique opportunity to accelerate the development and transformation
of STI systems in Member States. The (European Commission, 2022 [42]) has estimated the overall
expenditure for research and innovation in Member States’ recovery and resilience plans at around
EUR 44.4 billion, typically representing between 4% and 13 % of a country’s RRF allocation. These
investments target the green transition, digital technologies and health, and are accompanied by STI policy
reforms in some countries.
Although the European Commission continues to channel much of its support for research and innovation
through Horizon Europe and the structural funds, the toolkit of its innovation policy has expanded over the
years to cover the whole innovation chain. This had led to new initia tives, including the European
Innovation Council, established in 2021 with a budget of EUR 10 billion over seven years.13 The
European Commission adopted a New European Innovation Agenda in 2022 to position Europe at the
forefront of what is described as a new wave of ”deep-tech” innovation. Deep tech is rooted in cutting-edge
science, technology and engineering, and calls f or breakthrough R&D and large capital investments. The
agenda outlines dedicated actions to improve access to finance for European start -ups and scale -ups;
experiment new ideas through regulatory sandboxes; help create “regional innovation valleys”, includ ing
in lagging regions; attract and retain talent in Europe; and improve the STI policy framework (European
Commission, 2022[43]). Many of the actions are based on existing measures, which will be ex tended or
better linked to other measures.
Box 2.2. Important Projects of Common European Interest (IPCEIs)
The Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union provides the possibility to approve state aid for
IPCEIs. While these provisions have been used very rarely until recently, there is now strong
momentum to use IPCEIs more extensively to achieve the European Union’s quest for strategic
autonomy (Szczepański, 2020 [44]). IPCEIs are ambitious cross -border breakthrough innovation and
infrastructure projects led by EU Member States, which identify the scope of the project, select
participating companies and agree on project governance. Since Member States’ support constitutes

===== PDF_PAGE 63 =====
 61
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Growing emphasis on dual-use technologies
Well before Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, it was already apparent that the European security
environment had shifted, with Europe’s democratic systems challenged by a mix of hybrid threats
(European Commission, 2021 [47]). The European Commission considers investment in innovation and
better use of civilian technology in defence as key to enhancing Europe’s technological sovereignty and
reducing its strategic dependencies (EEAS, 2022[48]). Many critical technologies for security and defence
increasingly originate in the civilian domain, and use critical components with dual -use possibilities. The
European Commission publi shed the “Action Plan on Synergies between civil, defence and space
industries” in 2021, which aims to enhance complementarities between civil and defence EU programmes
and instruments, promote “spin-offs” from defence and space R&D for civil applications, and facilitate “spin-
ins” of civil -driven innovation into European defence co -operation projects (European Commission,
2021[49]). It followed this up in 2022 with its “Roadmap on critical technologies for security and defence”.
The roadmap identifies technologies critical for EU security and defence. It seeks to ensure that defence
considerations are better incorporated in civilian European research and innovation programmes, and vice
versa. It also aims to promote from the outset an EU-wide strategic and co-ordinated approach for critical
technologies for security and defence, and to reduce strategic dependencies and vulnerabilities in the
value and supply chains associated with these technologies (European Commission, 2022[50]).
In practice, plans like these have translated into increasing co -operation and co -ordination between civil
programmes like Horizon Europe and defence initiatives like the EDF, to make more effective use of
resources and technologies and create economies of scale (European Commission, 2020 [51]; European
Commission, 2020 [41]; Finkbeiner and Van Noorden, 2022 [52]). Established in 2021 with a budget of
EUR 8 billion over seven years, the EDF promotes R&D co -operation between public research (typically
research and technology organisation, rather than unive rsities) and firms. It supports competitive and
collaborative projects throughout the entire R&D cycle, including design, prototyping and testing. 14 The
action plan also includes the new Observatory on Critical Technologies for the space, defence and related
civil sectors, which will begin work in 2023. The observatory will identify, monitor and assess critical
technologies, including their potential application and related value and supply chains, and any root causes
of strategic dependencies and vulnerabilities (European Commission, 2022[50]).
United States: A “modern American industrial strategy”
Although the United States has tended to eschew a formal national industrial strategy, publicly funded R&D
and procurement in defence-related sectors have historically underpinned development and US leadership
state aid under EU rules, IPCEIs have to be notified to the European Commission for assessment and
must meet various criteria for approval (European Commission, 2021 [45]). The IPCEI on
microelectronics was the first to be approved in 2018, followed by an IPCEI on batteries in 2019. A
second IPCEI on batteries was approved in 2021 and aims to support research and innovation
throughout the battery value chain – from extraction of raw m aterials, through the design and
manufacturing of battery cells and packs, to the recycling and disposal in a circular economy – with a
strong focus on sustainability (European Commission, 2021 [45]). A further IPCEI on the hydrogen -
technology value chain was approved in 2022, covering the generation of hydrogen, fuel cells, storage,
transportation and distribution of hydrogen, and end -users applications, particularly in the mobility
sector (European Commission, 2022 [46]). To give a sense of the scale and coverage of IPCEIs, the
second battery initiative was established by 12 Member States, which will provide up to EUR 2.9 billion
in funding, to be co mplemented by an expected EUR 9 billion in private investments; the hydrogen
initiative involves 15 Member States providing up to EUR 5.4 billion in public funding, with an expected
private-sector investment of EUR 8.8 billion.

===== PDF_PAGE 64 =====
62 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

in many technologies, including integrated circuits, GPS and the internet. Breakthroughs like these are the
result of civil-military integration involving a world-class network of US universities and firms collaborating
closely, for example, through federal organisations like the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(Kania and Laskai, 2021[39]). China’s recent ascendancy in emerging critical technologies like 5G has led
several American policy makers and analysts to question whether this appro ach is sufficient for the
21st century, amid calls for a more active national industrial strategy that serves not only economic
development interests, but also national security (Guile et al., 2022[53]). Following this line of argument, the
United States needs to take a more formal, systemic and integrated approach to industrial policy if it is to
prevail in its technological rivalry with China. Such an approach should cover all economic sectors that
contribute to the country’s overall technical capabilities and production resilience, and aim to enhance the
innovation-enabling “operating environment” in which firms, institutions and individuals work (Atkinson,
2020[54]; Allison et al., 2021[55]; SCSP, 2022[56]).
Somewhat along these lines, the Biden Administration has signed three major bills with bipartisan support:
 The CHIPS and Science Act (2022) is discussed below (Box 2.3). Briefly, it aims to ensure the
United States maintains and advances its scientific and technological edge by investing in R&D,
skills and manufacturing in semiconductors, as well as in other technological a reas such as
nanotechnology, clean energy, quantum computing and AI. It also aims to unlock STI opportunities
beyond a few regions on the coasts and targets those groups who have been historically left out
(The White House, 2022 [57]). The US Department of Commerce (2022[58]) has since published a
USD 50 billion implementation strategy for the “CHIPS for America Fund”, which will disburse a
large tranche of the act’s funding. The National Science Foundation has also established a
technology, innovation and partnerships directo rate to strengthen the commercialisation of
research and technology.15
 The Inflation Reduction Act (2022) targets small businesses through measures that include
(i) doubling the refundable R&D tax credit for small businesses, from USD 250 000 to
USD 500 000; (ii) issuing domestic content requirements and offering targeted tax incentives to
spur the growth of American supply chains across technologies like solar, wind, carbon capture
and clean hydrogen; (iii) supporting the deployment of distributed zero -emission technologies
through a new “Clean Energy and Sustainability Accelerator”, which will prioritise over 50% of its
investments in disadvantaged communities; and (iv) assisting rural electric cooperatives by funding
clean energy and energy efficiency upgrades (The White House, 2022[59]).
 The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (2021) aims to strengthen domestic production to
revitalise the US industrial base. It includes commitments to build zero-emission vehicles and their
components domestically, using grants to support battery and battery component manufacturing,
manufacturing facilities, and retooling and retrofitting of existing facilities. It also aims to invest in
advanced energy manufacturing facilities and clean energy demonstration projects in communities
where coal mines or power plants have been shut down (The White House, 2021[60]).
According to The White House (2022[61]), a strong vision of a “modern American industrial strategy” unifies
these laws. This strategy commits to making substantial public investments in three key areas, namely
infrastructure, innovation and clean energy. It seeks to “crowd in” private investment and spur innovations
that work towards achieving core economic and national security interests. These laws are all multi -year
mobilisation efforts but are expected to spur investments at a historical scale, totalling USD 3.5 trillion over
the next decade when counting both public capital and private investment.
The industrial strategy strongly emphasises developing manufacturing capabilities, since these create well-
paid jobs, decrease supply -chain vulnerabili ties, and are the basis for building and maintaining
technological leadership. As such, they are part of the strategy to contribute to a more resilient and secure
US economy, better positioning the United States to weather future shocks. Addressing inequal ity is a
critical part of the approach, and many of the strategy’s instruments target disadvantaged groups and

===== PDF_PAGE 65 =====
 63
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

areas. Moreover, for all its emphasis on developing domestic technological and manufacturing capabilities,
the strategy recognises the importance of international partnerships to fulfil its mandate (The White House,
2022[61]).
Strengthening international STI alliances
The third type of strategic autonomy policy intervention is rooted in the pr ojection of national interests in
international regulations, norms, standards and alliances. The confluence of issues related to trade,
technology and democracy has broadened perspectives on the role of technology in shaping and driving
new international alignment and alliance patterns (Soare and Pothier, 2021[8]). At one level, these alliances
are forged between like-minded democracies, such as OECD countries, which can gain (for example) from
regulatory co -operation to jointly set global technology standards based on shared values (Bauer and
Erixon, 2020 [62]). At another level, they aim to project competing norms and values globally through
technology investments and assistance, particularly in low - and middle-income economies. Examples of
related policies include China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), and the G7 Partnership for Global
Infrastructure and Investment initiative.
In some respects, these efforts at alliance -building represent a “recoupling” with like -minded and
trustworthy allies – sometimes referred to as “friend-shoring”. Strategic autonomy should not be conflated
with isolationism, and no single country has all the technological c apabilities required to successfully
compete in the global economy and preserve its national security. Countries can amplify their domestic
innovation strengths through well-chosen strategic alliances, while at the same time enhancing their own
national security by supporting the technological capabilities of others.
This section starts with China, highlighting the science and technology aspects of its ambitious BRI and its
recent push to shape international technological standards. It then turns to new technology alliances forged
by the European Union and the United States.
China’s Belt and Road Initiative and standardisation push
Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)
Initially launched in 2013, the BRI is China’s signature foreign policy initiative, surpassing the post-Second
World War Marshall Plan as the largest global infrastructure project ever undertaken. Chinese banks and
businesses have invested billions of dollars under the BRI to fund and develop telecommunications
infrastructure, power plants, ports and highways in dozens of countries. Its scope has since expanded to
include a Digital Silk Road aiming to improve recipient countries’ telecommunications networks, AI
capabilities, cloud computing, and e -commerce and mobile payment systems (among other high -tech
areas), as well as a Health Silk Road aiming to put China’s vision of global health governance into action
(Council on Foreign Relations, 2021 [63]). China is also using the BRI, particularly its Di gital Silk Road
component, to complement its efforts to promote domestic standards in international standards
organisations and industry groups (see below) and advance regulatory harmonisation . By 2021, the BRI
encompassed over 140 countries, representing close to 40% of global output and 63% of the world’s
population (Huang, 2022[64]).
The BRI includes STI activities that address developmental challenges, particularly in agriculture, energy
and health care. Already in 2016, the Ministry of Science and Technology, the National Development and
Reform Commission, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Commerce jointly released the Plan
on Cooperation in Science, Technology and Innovation under the BRI (MOST (China Ministry of Science
and Technology), 2017[65]). Science and Technology Daily (2022[66]) reports that by the end of 2021, China
had engaged in STI co -operation with 84 countries through the BRI, supporting 1 118 joint research
projects and establishing 53 joint laboratory projects. Furthermore, more than 30 bilateral or multilateral

===== PDF_PAGE 66 =====
64 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

technology transfer centres between China and other countries had been built thanks to the BRI. Since
2016, the BRI has supported the exchange and training of around 180 000 science and technology
personnel in China, and over 14 000 young scientists for short -term research work. While it is difficult to
estimate the costs of these activities, Chen (2019[67]) estimates that the Chinese Academy of Sciences
alone had already provided around USD 268 million to ST I projects associated with the BRI by 2019, a
figure that is likely much larger today.16
The Chinese Academy of Sciences also established in 2018 the Alliance of International Science
Organizations (ANSO), a non -profit, non -governmental international scien tific organisation that aims to
support the needs and scientific capacity -building of the Global South through partnerships and co -
operation with its member countries and institutions. ANSO currently has 67 members from 48 countries,
including 27 national academies, 23 universities, 10 national research institutes and agencies, and
7 international organisations. It funds and organises fellowships and scholarships, training programmes
and collaborative research, and offers awards and prizes to both individuals and organisations. Its budget
is modest – around USD 13 million in 2021, most of which funded scholarships and collaborative research
projects.17
China Standards 2035
Standards are critical to innovation: they provide a foundation for technology developm ent and
interoperability, and safeguard global market access to technologies (Blind, 2013[68]). Following the Made
in China 2025 strategy, the Chinese government launched China Standards 2035 in 2018. This strategy
aims to optimise the governance of standardisation in China, enhance its effectiveness and improve the
level of internationalisation of China’s standards. 18 In particular, it aims to improve the traditionally weak
interaction between standard isation and technological innovation in China, and establish a formal
mechanism to link scientific and technological projects and standardisation work (Xinhua News Agency,
2021[36]). This will be important for China as it seeks to develop R&D ecosystems that elevate whole-sector
capacities, particularly in critical and emerging industries like AI, quantum computing and biotechnology
(Wu, 2022[69]). China Standards 2035 also aims to promote compatibility between Chinese standards and
the international standards systems, including through mutual recognition and co -ordinated development
of domestic and foreign standards. The strategy also promotes sta ndards co -operation within the BRI
(Xinhua News Agency, 2021[36]).
International standards emerge from a variety of sources, with international standard-setting organisations
playing important roles.19 Firms collaborate internationally with other players (including competitors) within
these organisations to develop and adopt standards created through co -ordinated technical efforts
(Shivakumar, 2022[70]). Thanks to their technological supremacy, US firms have taken the lead in creating
and setting international standards in these fora for much of the post-Second World War era. However, as
China’s innovation capacity grows in key technologies, its capability to influence international standards is
also set to increase (Wigell et al., 2022[71]). This is creating considerable uncertainty, as the United States
(and other like-minded countries) and China have different styles of engagement and hold different values.
While participants in these bodies include a mix of government and private -sector researchers from
member countries, the US approach has been to let the private sector take the lead, leverag ing its
extensive technical expertise and experience, and its knowledge of market need and demands (Goodman
and Robert, 2021 [4]). By contrast, China (and to some extent, the European Union) takes a more
government-led approach, which some interpret as a politicisation of what has been widely perceived until
now as a technocratic process. Technical standards also set the norms that govern the privacy and security
of different technologies, particularly digital technologies. Since these have so far been based on the values
and norms of liberal market economies, there are concerns that China’s increasing domination in standard-
setting organisations could pose a strategic risk to their integrity owing to diverging values (Wigell et al.,
2022[71]). These tensions have led to fears that the role of international standard -setting organisations in

===== PDF_PAGE 67 =====
 65
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

establishing fair and credible standards will be undermined , ultimately damaging technological progress
and market competition (Shivakumar, 2022[70]).
New alliances involving the European Union and the United States
Both the United States and the European Union have made recent pronouncements on the importance of
international engagement to promote democracy-affirming norms and values, and reduce risks to national
security inherent in technologies with dual -use potential. For example, in its industrial strategy plans, The
White House acknowledges the importance of supply chain diversification, including through efforts to
“friend-shore” some production (The White House, 2022[61]).
EU-US Trade and Technology Council
Having convened for the first time in 2021, the EU-US Trade and Technology Council aims to promote the
responsible use of technologies, in line with democratic values and protection of human rights. It seeks to
enhance trans-Atlantic co-operation on a range of issues, including export controls and FDI screening, in
defence of national security, secure supply chains (especially with regard to semiconductors) and
technology standards, including co-operation on AI. In all, it aims to ensure joint leadership in setting global
norms for emerging and other critical technologies, and counter authoritarian influence in the digital and
emerging technology space (EU-US Trade and Technology Council, 2021[72]). The council has established
ten working groups to explore co -operation on these topics, in full respect of each side’s regulatory
autonomy.20
Other regional groupings
The Quad is a loose grouping between Australia, India, Japan and the United States that promotes shared
democratic values and respect for universal human rights in the ways technology is designed, developed,
governed and used (The White House, 2021[73]). Its focus includes critical and emerging technologies (for
which it recently issued “Principles for Critical Technology Supply -Chain Security”, organised around the
pillars of security, transparency, autonomy and integrity),21 climate-change mitigation and adaptation, and
space technologies. The Quad also launched the Quad Vaccine Partnership in 2021 to advance equitable
access to safe and effective vaccines in the Indo -Pacific region (Huang, 2022 [64]). The Quad operates
through expert working groups and international meetings, including biennial leaders’ summits.
A new, larger grouping covering the Asia -Pacific region was launched in 2022, known as the Indo -Pacific
Economic Framework for Prosperity.22 One of its chief aims is to diversify supply chains to ensure secure
access to semiconductors, critical minerals and clean energy technology (The White House, 2022[74]). The
United States also announced the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity in 2022 to help supply
chains in the region be more resilient against unexpected shocks, and to promote innovation in both the
public and private sectors (The White House, 2022[75]).
Group of Seven (G7)
The G7’s agenda has long covered STI issues, and the initiatives outlined here are among the latest in a
long line. The largest initiative to date is the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII),
announced during the 2022 G7 Leaders’ Summit. The partnership aims to mobilise USD 600 billion in
global infrastructure investments by 2027, with up to EUR 300 billion in investments channelled through
the European Union’s Global Gateway initiative, 23 and USD 200 million co ming from the United States
(The White House, 2022 [76]). Through blended finance, the PGII seeks to mobilise public and private
resources in pursuit of values -driven, high -quality and sustainable infr astructure development. The
European Union’s Global Gateway initiative focuses on digital, climate and energy, transport, health, and
education and research, and is underpinned by a values -based approach promoting democratic values,
high standards, strong governance and transparency (Liao and Beal, 2022 [77]). The US initiative focuses
on clean energy, secure digital networks and infrastructures, advancing gender equality and health security

===== PDF_PAGE 68 =====
66 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

(The White House, 2022[78]). Both initiatives emphasise the competitiveness benefits of these investments
for their domestic firms, in addition to their job creation potential. Both also call for a whole-of-government
approach, given the levels of investments involved and their expansive coverage.
Other recent relevant G7 initiatives include the Working Group on the Security and Integrity of the Global
Research Ecosystem, which was established to develop principl es, best practices, and a virtual academy
and toolkit for research security and integrity (G7-Summit, 2022[79]); and a new Climate Club to accelerate
climate action and increase ambition, with a particular focus on the industrial sector (G7, 2022[80]).
Strengthening strategic autonomy in action: Semiconductors and critical
minerals
Policy discussions on technological sovereignty and vulnerabilities from interdependency often cite two
prime examples: semiconductors and critical minerals. OECD countries and China are investing heavily in
both areas, using a mix of protection, promotion and projection policies, as described below.
Semiconductors
Semiconductors are the building blocks of digital technologies and are most widespread in telecoms,
computers and other consumer electronics, as well as motor vehicles and medical devices (OECD,
2021[21]). Semiconductor production is fragmented and specialised in a highly cost -efficient global supply
chain, which begins with chip design 24 and continues through semiconductor manufacturing, testing,
assembly and packaging, before reaching end -user companies that incorporate the chips into their
products. No country or region has control over the entire value chain as each actor performs different
steps of the production process according to their comparative advantages (Varas, 2021[81]). However,
those segments involving manufacturing, assembly and testing are more concentrated, 25 mainly because
of the enormous upfront investment costs in building state -of-the-art production facilities. While the
United States once dominated semiconductor production, many of its firms moved to a “fabless” production
model some time ago (or were established as such from the outset, e.g. Qualcomm), outsourcing their
chip designs to contract manufacturing companies that specialise in operating foundries for third parties
(European Commission, 2022 [82]). Today, Korea and Chinese Taipei are typically in the middle of the
supply chain: their semiconductor foundries import silicon wafers and equipment from Japan, Europe and
the United States to produce chips that are then exported to China for integration into consumer goods,
which are then re-exported to OECD countries (OECD, 2019[83]).
A major driver of innovation in the sector is miniaturisation of microprocessors that squeeze an ever -
increasing number of transistors into a given area to make them faster and more power-efficient. The most
advanced chips currently in production have a le ngth of 5 nanometres (nm), which is expected to fall to
2nm by 2026. PCs and mobile phones are the main drivers of miniaturisation, and their high production
volumes help to sustain the high cost of technology development and state -of-the-art production facilities.
Chipmakers typically invest about one-third of their revenues in R&D and equipment. The cost of building
a leading-edge fabrication plant can be as high as EUR 20 billion (with an additional EUR 5 billion per year
to operate the plant). Only two companies, TSMC (Chinese Taipei) and Samsung (Korea), currently
manufacture chips at 5nm, while Europe had no foundries that manufacture components below 22nm in
2021 (European Commission, 2021[11]).
The high concentration of semiconductor manufacturing in Asia raises concerns about vulnerability to
production disruptions. The effect of such disruption would be more consequential because the
semiconductor industry is an upstream industry. i.e. it supp lies inputs to a wide range of other industries
(Haramboure et al., forthcoming[84]). Recent semiconductor shortages, related to exceptional demand and
supply shocks associated with the COVID -19 pandemi c, have only served to exacerbate supply -chain

===== PDF_PAGE 69 =====
 67
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

concerns. Similarly, Asian countries look to reduce vulnerabilities tied to their dependence on US chip
design and the most advanced European photolithography equipment. While somewhat behind global
leaders in producing the most advanced chips, China is concerned about export controls, such as those
recently announced by the United States to restrict its ability to obtain advanced computing chips, develop
and maintain supercomputers, and manufacture advanced se miconductors (US Department of
Commerce, 2022[85]).
Until recently, the bulk of public budgetary support in OECD countries has been upstream, targeting the
R&D activities of semiconductor firms with r esearch grants and R&D tax incentives. This reflects their
specialisation in research -intensive segments of semiconductor supply chains. 26 By contrast, China has
used massive subsidies to reduce its reliance on imports and its vulnerability to unilateral US export control
restrictions, earmarking as much as USD 200 billion over a ten-year period under its Made in China 2025
plan to strengthen domestic research and manufacturing capabilities across the whole supply chain
(EPRS, 2022 [86]).27 Coupled with pressures from semiconductor shortages and renewed interest in
industrial policies to promote inclusive economic competitiveness and national security, this sort of support
has kicked-off a “subsidy race”, wi th all of the main players (i.e. the United States, the European Union,
Korea, Chinese Taipei and Japan) recently launching ambitious initiatives to promote their domestic
semiconductor industries. By way of example, Box 2.3 outlines recent “chips acts” em anating from the
European Union and the United States. Initiatives like these still focus on R&D investments, but also
feature other industrial policy incentives, such as those that promote manufacturing (e.g. through subsidies
for building and running fabrication facilities)28 or seek to attract overseas investment and talent.
Box 2.3. Recent “chips acts” in the United States and the European Union
United States CHIPS and Science Act
Signed into law in August 2 022, the CHIPS and Science Act provides USD 52.7 billion for
semiconductor research, development, manufacturing and workforce development. This includes
USD 13.2 billion for R&D and workforce development, and USD 500 million to advance international
information and communications technology (ICT) security and semiconductor supply -chain activities.
The act stipulates the establishment of a technology, innovation and partnerships directorate at the
National Science Foundation, which was established in late-2022 to focus on fields like semiconductors
and advanced computing, advanced communications technology, advanced energy technologies,
quantum information technologies and biotechnology. It also expands fundamental and use -inspired
research at the Department of Energy's Office of Science, and the National Institute of Standards and
Technology. Besides supporting research, the act also seeks to strengthen the commercialisation of
research and technology, for example, through a 25% investment tax credit covering capital expenses
for the manufacturing of semiconductors and related equipment. To spur regional economic
development bringing together businesses, universities and local communities, the act has earmarked
USD 10 billion for the creation of regional partn erships that will develop technology, innovation and
manufacturing sectors (The White House, 2022[57]).
European Chips Act
The European Chips Act, adopted by the European Commission in February 2022, seeks to strengthen
the European Union’s semiconductor ecosystem, ensure the resilience of supply chains, reduce
external dependencies and double the European Union’s global market share in semiconductors to
20% by 2030 (European Commission, 2022 [87]). The act is expected to mobilise more than
EUR 43 billion in public and private investments, with EUR 11 billion coming from repurposing existing
funds under the European Union’s Horizon Europe and Digital Europe programmes (Zubașcu, 2022[88]).
The act focuses on five strategic objectives: (i) strengthen research and technological leadership;

===== PDF_PAGE 70 =====
68 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Conducting the entire semiconductor manufacturing process in a single jurisdiction is neither feasible nor
economically desirable (OECD, 2019 [83]), and “strategic autonomy” cannot be reached without trusted
international partners (Duchâtel, 2022 [89]). The US CHIPS and Science Act is notable in this regard
because it allocates USD 500 million over five years towards a CHIPS for America In ternational
Technology Security and Innovation Fund, which is intended to help the United States and like -minded
governments co-ordinate their security and supply-chain activities (Valigra, 2022[90]).
Critical minerals
Many clean energy technologies rely on critical minerals such as copper, lithium, nickel, cobalt and rare -
earth elements.29 One of the major uses of these critical minerals is the production of permanent magnets
for motors (e.g. in electric vehicles and wind turbine generators), where demand is expected to grow faster
than for any other sector, driven by the strong uptake of clean energy technologies. According to the
International Energy Agency (IEA) (IEA, 2021[91]), a typical electric car requires six times more mineral
inputs than a conventional car, while an onshore wind plant requires nine times more mineral resources
than a gas-fired plant for the same capacity ( Figure 2.11). Moreover, in its “Net -Zero Emissions by 2050
Scenario”, the IEA estimates that mineral inputs for the production of energy -related infrastructure and
end-use equipment will be up to six times higher in 2040 than today. Rare -earth permanent magnets are
also used, for example, in ICT equipment (e.g. laptops, mobile phones and cameras) and medical
resonance imaging equipment. They are also crucial for modern weaponry, includin g combat aircraft,
drones and missile guidance systems (Alves Dias et al., 2020[92]; Matthews, 2022[93]).
(ii) build and reinforce Europe’s capacity to innovate in the design, manufacturing and packaging of
advanced chips; (iii) put in place a framework to increase production by 2030; (iv) address skill
shortages and attract new talent; and (v) develop an in -depth understanding of global semiconductor
supply chains (European Commission, 2022[87]). It proposes a three-pillar structure: Pillar 1 is intended
to bolster large -scale technological capacity -building and innovation in the EU chips ecosystem,
improving the tra nsition ”from lab to fab”; Pillar 2 focuses on improving EU security of supply by
attracting investment and enhancing production capacities within the European Union; and Pillar 3 aims
to set up a monitoring and crisis response mechanism. Pillar 1, which is most relevant to this chapter,
aims to reinforce Europe’s leadership in research; enable access across Europe to chip design tools,
and pilot lines for prototyping and testing innovative chips technologies; promote education, skills and
talent in microel ectronics; and support a network of competence centres across Europe to promote
innovative design and use of semiconductors systems (EPRS, 2022[86]). The act is still under review
and is slated to be passed sometime in 2023.

===== PDF_PAGE 71 =====
 69
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 2.11. Mineral intensity of selected clean and fossil energy technologies

Note: Steel and aluminium are not included. The values for vehicles are for the entire vehicle, including batteries, motors and g lider. The
intensities for an electric car are based on a 75 kilowatt-hour (kWh) nickel manganese cobalt (NMC) 622 cathode and graphite -based anode.
The values for offshore wind and onshore wind are based respectively on the direct -drive permanent magnet synchronous generator system
(including array cables) and the doubly-fed induction generator system.
Source: (IEA, 2021[91]).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/389tob
Much policy attention focuses on rare -earth elements, by virtue of their importance and the geographic
concentration of their production and processing ( Figure 2.12). While rare earths are abundant in the
Earth's crust, mi nable concentrations are rarer than for most other mineral commodities (US Geological
Survey, 2022[94]). Owing to their environmental impacts, many mines and refining facilities have closed in
recent decades.30 China accounted for around 60% of rare earths mined in 2021, a decline compared to
recent years. However, the processing of critical minerals is typically more concentrated than their
extraction, and China heavily dominates production at every st age of the supply chain downstream of
mining in both electric-vehicle batteries and photovoltaics (IEA, 2022[95]; Schwellnus et al., forthcoming[96];
OECD, 2022[97]). This is an outcome of policies that have supported the growth of a vertically integrated
domestic supply chain as a strategic industrial sector (Politi, 2022[98]). It reflects China’s growing market
share in major downstream industrial ecosystems, which consume 70 -75% of the global supply of rare
earths (Alves Dias et al., 2020[92]).31
A. Transport (kg/vehicule)
B. Power generation (kg/MW)
 0 2 000 4 000 6 000 8 000 10 000 12 000 14 000 16 000 18 000
Offshore wind
Onshore wind
Solar PV
Nuclear
Coal
Natural gas
Copper Nickel Manganese Cobalt Zinc Rare earths Lithium Graphite Chromium Molybdenum Silicon Others
0 50 100 150 200 250
Electric car
Conventional car
 0 2 000 4 000 6 000 8 000 10 000 12 000 14 000 16 000 18 000
Offshore wind
Onshore wind
Solar PV
Nuclear
Coal
Natural gas

===== PDF_PAGE 72 =====
70 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 2.12. Current production of many energy-transition minerals is more geographically
concentrated than for oil or natural gas

Source: IEA, Share of top three producing countries in extraction of selected minerals and fossil fuels, 2019, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/data-
and-statistics/charts/share-of-top-three-producing-countries-in-extraction-of-selected-minerals-and-fossil-fuels-2019.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/7izuv2
China’s embargo on rare -earth exports to Japan in 2010 -11 raised supply concerns, yet separation and
refining of rare-earth oxides continue to be predominantly performed in China (Alves Dias et al., 2020[92];
Nakano, 2021[99]).32 The main Chinese rare-earth mining and processing companies are state-owned and
subsidised through both direct and indirect policy measures (Gauß et al., 2021 [100]). Beyond rare -earth
elements, Russia’s war of aggression in Ukraine has raised further concerns about the supply of other
critical minerals for green technology. For example, Russia accounts for one -quarter of worldwide
palladium exports and, together with Ukraine, one-third of global nickel exports (OECD, 2022[18]).33 Ukraine
is also a major exporter of neon gas, a by -product of steel production used in semiconductor lithography
(OECD, 2022[13]).
These concerns have encouraged investment in new sources of supply to enha nce the diversity and
resilience of clean energy supply chains. For example, several new projects have been launched outside
China, and some 20 projects are currently under development in Australia, Canada and the United States
(IEA, 2021 [91]). However, long lead times to bring new mineral production online, as well as various
environmental and social impacts, all raise concerns about the stability and sustainability of critical mineral
supply.34 No single country will be able to solve these issues alone. Strengthened international co -
operation, combining open markets, strategic partnerships and a diversity of supply sources, will be
essential to guarantee the security, resilience and sustainabili ty of critical minerals (IEA, 2022[95]; OECD,
2022[97]). Along these lines, the United States and key partner countries have announced the establishment
of the Minerals Security Partn ership (MSP), an ambitious new initiative to bolster critical minerals supply
chains, and to ensure that critical minerals are produced, processed, and recycled in a manner that
supports the ability of countries to realise the full economic development ben efit of their geological
endowments (US Department of Commerce, 2022 [85]). New supplies of critical minerals can also be
unlocked through innovation in production and processing technologies (for examp le, emerging
technologies like direct lithium extraction, or increased metal recovery from low -grade ores or waste
United States
United States
United States
Chile
Chile
Indonesia
Democratic Republic of Congo
China
China
China
China
Australia
Saudi Arabia
Iran
Russian
Federation
Russian
Federation
Russian Federation
Russian Federation
Philippines
Myanmar
Peru
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Lithium
Rare earths
Cobalt
Graphite
Nickel
Copper
Oil
Natural gas
Australia
%

===== PDF_PAGE 73 =====
 71
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

streams), which would help reduce the need for new primary supplies. Technologies that lower energy or
water use can also bring environmental and operational benefits (IEA, 2021[91]).
Supply vulnerabilities could also be reduced by switching to other green technologies or critical mineral
substitutes, although these are generally less effective (US Geological Survey, 2022 [94]). Innovation is
therefore key to making green technologies less material -intensive, and their critical materials easier to
recycle. While performance -competitive rare earth -free per manent magnets are still some way off,
research is driving progress to reduce consumption of rare earths in the automotive industry and in wind
turbine generators (Alves Dias et al., 2020[92]). For example, emerging sodium -ion technologies that rely
on abundant and cheap minerals, and solid -state batteries could lead to a step improvement in
performance. For solar photovoltaics, organic and non -silicon thin -film technologies promise higher
efficiencies and lower manufacturing costs, although they remain at the prototype stage (IEA, 2022[95]).
As for recycling, rare earths are currently recovered in limited quantities from batteries, permanent magnets
and fluorescent lamps (US Geological Survey, 2022 [94]). Indeed, only 1% of rare -earth elements are
currently recycled in Europe (a proportion that is likely similar globally), highlighting the need to greatly
enhance recycling systems and infrastructure (Alves Dias et al., 2020 [92]). This will likely require
government support to incentivise recycling of end-of-life products, support collection and sorting activities,
and fund R&D on new recycling technologies (IEA, 2021[91]).
This is a systemic challenge that calls for various sorts of co-operation, including cross-governmental and
international. Along these lines, both the E uropean Union and the United States have launched wide -
ranging policy initiatives in recent years to address vulnerabilities in supply chains for critical minerals, as
briefly described in Box 2.4.
Box 2.4. Recent EU and US initiatives to enhance supply-chain diversity in critical minerals
European Union
The European Commission developed the Action Plan on Critical Raw Materials and founded the
European Raw Materials Alliance (ERMA) in 2020. The action plan l everages Horizon Europe,
European Regional Development Funds, and national research and innovation programmes on waste
processing, advanced materials and substitution. For example, around EUR 300 million was earmarked
under Horizon Europe’s first work prog ramme (2021-22) to fund raw materials -related research and
innovation. Projects should concentrate on exploration, mining, processing, refining, recycling and
substitution, as well as skill development, responsible mining practices, international co -operation with
resource-rich nations, secondary -source mapping in the European Union and identifying investment
needs (European Commission, 2021 [11]). ERMA has been entrusted with identifying and addressing
legislative bottlenecks, and related opportunities that would enable the emergence of alternative
European and worldwide rare-earth supply chains. It also aims to promote a circular economy around
rare-earth elements, by advancing recycling and substituti on (Gauß et al., 2021 [100]). The European
Commission has also published a foresight study on critical materials for strategic technologies and
sectors in the European Union (European Commission, 2020 [101]), which identified supply risks in the
stages of processed materials, components and assemblies.
United States
Building on earlier analysis of supply -chain vulnerabilities, the Biden Administratio n announced in
October 2022 the American Battery Materials Initiative to align and utilise federal resources to expand
the end-to-end battery supply chain. It aims to promote close collaboration with stakeholders, allies and
partners to develop more sustai nable, secure and resilient supply chains. It covers steps to steer
research, grants and loans that support ecologically responsible essential -mineral extraction,
processing and recycling. The initiative also incorporates diplomatic efforts to construct re liable and

===== PDF_PAGE 74 =====
72 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Outlook
Thanks to its ascendancy in science and technology, China has contributed significantly to the world’s
stock of knowledge through its scientific research. It has also accelerated innovation in technology areas,
particularly photovoltaics and electric -vehicle batteries, that are critical to sustainability transitions.
However, as China is often seen as a systemic rival to liberal market economies, its rise also raises policy
concerns that have deepened in recent years as relations have deteriorated. These include growing
competition in critical technologies that are expected to underpin future economic competitiveness and
national security, diverging values and interests that challenge the international post -Second World War
rules-based order, and growing vulnerability from supply-chain interdependencies.
Technology lies at the core of these concerns, prompting technology leaders such as the European Union
and the United States to promote technological sovereignty and strategic autonomy as strategic policy
goals. Countries have adopted policies to restrict access to technologies (protection), invest in ambitious
domestic industrial policies to bolster their economic competitiveness (promotion) and strengthen
international technology alliances with like-minded countries (projection). The chapter has to some extent
taken a symmetrical view to illustrate that China has many similar concerns regarding liberal market
economies, and it is perhaps unsurprising to see certain parallels in the policy goals set and instruments
used. Policy domains such as trade, foreign affairs, defence and industry are driving many of these policy
developments, while research and innovation ministries and funding agencies have played a less central
role. Some of these policy domains have considerable science and innovation activities of their own
(e.g. defence and industry), others less so (e.g. foreign affairs).
The policy developments outlined in this chapter could have profound effects on STI policies, but these
remain underexplored, particularly at an internationally comparative level. Taking first the restrictions
imposed by protection measure s – related to export controls, FDI screening, negative lists and research
security – these will lead to a certain degree of decoupling between technology (and possibly science)
ecosystems in China and liberal market economies. It remains difficult to pred ict how far this decoupling
will go. While autarky is unlikely, the global economy could split into rival blocs that significantly reduce
science and technology linkages compared to today. Assuming governments apply protection measures
flexibly on a case-by-case basis according to specific threats, continuous co-ordination between STI policy
and other policy domains – notably trade and investment, foreign affairs and national security, and
environment and energy – will be essential, although existing links in most countries remain weak. Most
R&D in technology-intensive economies is conducted in firms, where trade and investment restrictions will
be felt most keenly. Firms may also face skill shortages in economies dependent on overseas talent if
mobility is hindered because of visa restrictions or an unwelcoming environment. This issue applies
especially to public science, where overseas PhD students and researchers make up a sizeable part of
the workforce, particularly in the United States.
Promotion measures, in the shape of technology-fuelled industrial policies, look more positive for science
and innovation activities at first glance. More resources could be available, especially given the large
investments proposed, although what sorts of research and inn ovation will be funded is less clear. Many
of these policies adopt whole -ecosystem perspectives, so investments could cover the full range of the
sustainable global supply chains. These include the creation of the Mineral Security Partnership, to
catalyse investment from governments and the private sector in strategic opportunities that adhere to
high environmental, social and governance standards across the entire value chain. The United States
Geological Services has also been awarded more than USD 500 million from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law to better map mineral resources, preserve historical geologic data and samples, and
construct an energy and minerals research centre (The White House, 2022[102]).

===== PDF_PAGE 75 =====
 73
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

innovation chain – including basic science – and support the costs of new research and technical
infrastructures. Many policies are also mission -oriented, mobilising multiple ministries and stakeholders,
and involve ambitious public -private partnerships, which could bolster industry -academic links.
Furthermore, they often seek to accelerate sustainability transitions and promote greater societal inclusion
(see Chapter 3), which should affect how, where – and by whom – research and innovation are prioritised
and performed. A large domestic skill -development programme is important in this respect – especially if
international mobility declines and fewer overseas STEM personnel are available – but such investments
take several years to yield benefits. New EU and US industrial policies have taken care to signal the
importance of developing international linkages with li ke-minded countries, which could spur new
opportunities for international co -operation in science and innovation. At the same time, there exists a
danger of these large public investments descending into a “subsidy race”, with countries competing more
for private investments than co -operating on shared -interest technology developments. Domestic
STI ecosystems could be damaged irreparably if high -tech firms are attracted by generous subsidies
offered elsewhere and uproot their operations.
Finally, projection measures, particularly in the form of technology standards and international technology
alliances and partnerships, could provide platforms for diversifying and intensifying cross -country
STI linkages. These policy efforts can be seen as part of a “recoupling” agenda that targets supply chains,
science and technology collaboration, and STI capacity-building in a wide range of high-, middle- and low-
income economies. As with the other types of policies, cross-governmental co-ordination will be important,
including with overseas development policies. Projection measures provide opportunities for OECD
countries to diffuse and consolidate core values that promote sustainability, inclusion, and responsible
research and innovation on a more global scale. They co uld also spur much -needed investments in
research and innovation capacity -building in low - and middle -income countries, both aiding their
development objectives and contributing to solutions to global problems.
To some extent, the policies outlined in this chapter amount to “disruption by design”, but they also carry
the risk of unintended consequences. This might be said of any ambitious policy agenda, of course, but
the stakes are high, and mistakes are likely to be costly. Different technology supply chains have different
vulnerability risks, and the same applies to international science collaboration: different critical technologies
have varying dual-use potential, and countries differ in their capacities to exploit them. This variation points
to the need for a targeted policy approach, underpinned by risk -management assessments that draw on
the best available evidence, as well as forward -looking analysis where uncertainties preclude traditional
risk-based analysis. It also highlights the importance of a whole-of-government approach, given the range
of policy areas involved.
At the same time, while strategic competition presents its own challenges, it can also offer opportunities.
For example, international competition could be a major spur for technology-driven growth, and measures
to reduce technology dependency vulnerabilities through new investments could enhance global resilience
to future shocks. Furthermore, a “recoupling” agenda could potentially forge new research and innovation
alliances that may enable new science and technology leaders to emerge.
Strategic autonomy policies could be highly disruptive to existing STI ecosystems, whether presenting new
challenges or offering new opportunities. Their effects, intended or not, should be anticipated, and
adaptation and mitigation measures put in place. Much uncertainty and ambiguity remains, however,
calling for a future -scenario process that maps the “possibility space”. Taking a systemic view, such a
process should consider the range of possible dis ruptions and their upsides and downsides, as well as
alternative adjustment pathways and mitigation options. These policy measures could be disruptive at
multiple levels, including for innovative firms, public research -performing organisations (such as
universities and government labs) and even individuals (such as scientists), whose research collaborations
and mobility could be enhanced or curtailed. They could also strengthen or hinder prospects for
international STI co-operation to address global problem s. A key challenge for multilateralism will be to

===== PDF_PAGE 76 =====
74 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

reconcile growing strategic competition with the need for global action to tackle grand challenges, like
climate change. This challenge is further discussed in Chapter 3.
References

Allison, G. et al. (2021), “The Great Tech Rivalry: China vs the U.S.”, Belfer Center for Science
and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School,
https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/GreatTechRivalry_ChinavsUS_211207.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[55]
Alves Dias, P. et al. (2020), The role of rare earth elements in wind energy and electric mobility,
Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg,
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC122671 (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[92]
Araya, D. and M. Mavinkurve (2022), Emerging Technologies, Game Changers and the Impact
on National Security, Centre for International Governance Innovation,
https://www.cigionline.org/static/documents/NSS_Report9_SgEhTat.pdf (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[12]
Arcesati, R., I. Hors and S. Schwaag Serger (2021), “Sharpening Europe’s approach to
engagement with China on science, technology and innovation”, MERICS workshop input
paper, MERICS, https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2021-
12/211222_MERICS%20STI%20paper_final.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[30]
Atkinson, R. (2020), The Case for a National Industrial Strategy to Counter China’s
Technological Rise, ITIF, https://www2.itif.org/2020-case-counter-national-industrial-strategy-
china-technological-rise.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[54]
Bauer, M. and F. Erixon (2020), Europe’s Quest for Technology Sovereignty: Opportunities and
Pitfall, European Centre for International Political Economy, Brussels, https://ecipe.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/05/ECI_20_OccPaper_02_2020_Technology_LY02.pdf (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[62]
Bilgin, E. and A. Loh (2021), Techno-nationalism: China’s bid for global technological
leadership,”, https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/cff/2021/09/28/techno-nationalism-chinas-bid-for-global-
technological-leadership/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[37]
Blind, K. (2013), “The Impact of Standardization and Standards on Innovation” , Nesta Working
Paper, No. No. 13/15, Nesta,
https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/the_impact_of_standardization_and_standards_on_inn
ovation.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[68]
Brown, A., J. Gunter and M. Zenglein (2021), “Course correction: China’s shifting approach to
economic globalization”, Mercator Institute for China Studies (Merics), Berlin,
https://merics.org/en/report/course-correction-chinas-shifting-approach-economic-
globalization (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[38]
Center for Security and Emerging Technology (2021), China’s STI Operations: Monitoring
Foreign Science and Technology Through Open Sources, Center for Security and Emerging
Technology, https://doi.org/10.51593/20200049.
[34]

===== PDF_PAGE 77 =====
 75
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Chen, N. (2019), “Chinese Sciences Academy Provides 268 mln Dollars for BRI Projects”,
https://english.cas.cn/newsroom/news/201904/t20190419_208623.shtml (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[67]
China Power Team (2021), “Will the Dual Circulation Strategy Enable China to Compete in a
Post-Pandemic World?”, China Power, https://chinapower.csis.org/china-covid-dual-
circulation-economic-strategy (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[33]
Council on Foreign Relations (2021), “China’s Belt and Road: Implications for the United States” ,
Independent Task Force Report No. 79, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, NY, United
States, https://www.cfr.org/report/chinas-belt-and-road-implications-for-the-united-
states/download/pdf/2021-
04/TFR%20%2379_China%27s%20Belt%20and%20Road_Implications%20for%20the%20U
nited%20States_FINAL.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[63]
Crespi, F. et al. (2021), “European Technological Sovereignty: An Emerging Framework for
Policy Strategy”, Intereconomics, Vol. 56/6, pp. 348-354, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10272-021-
1013-6.
[6]
Criscuolo, C. et al. (2022), “An industrial policy framework for OECD countries: Old debates, new
perspectives”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 127, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0002217c-en.
[29]
Criscuolo, C. et al. (2022), “Are industrial policy instruments effective?: A review of the evidence
in OECD countries”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 128, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/57b3dae2-en.
[26]
Criscuolo, C., G. Lalanne and L. Díaz (2022), “Quantifying industrial strategies
(QuIS): Measuring industrial policy expenditures”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Working Papers, No. 2022/05, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ae351abf-en.
[112]
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (2022), “DFG Annual General Meeting 2022 in Freiburg:
Focus on International Research Cooperation”, Press Release No. 21,
https://www.dfg.de/en/service/press/press_releases/2022/press_release_no_21/index.html
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[20]
DiPippo, G., I. Mazzocco and S. Kennedy (2022), Red Ink: Estimating Chinese Industrial Policy
Spending in Comparative Perspective, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/publication/220523_DiPippo_Red_Ink.pdf?VersionId=LH8ILLKWz4o.bjrwNS7csuX_C0
4FyEre (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[27]
Duchâtel, M. (2022), “Semiconductors in Europe: the return of industrial policy”, Policy paper,
Institut Montaigne, Paris,
https://www.institutmontaigne.org/ressources/pdfs/publications/europe-new-geopolitics-
technology-1.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[89]
Edler, J. et al. (2021), Technology Sovereignty as an Emerging Frame for Innovation Policy –
Defining Rationales, Ends and Means,
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/cci/innovation-systems-policy-
analysis/2021/discussionpaper_70_2021.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[5]

===== PDF_PAGE 78 =====
76 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

EEAS (2022), A Strategic Compass for Security and Defence, European Union,
https://www.eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/strategic_compass_en3_web.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[48]
EPRS (2022), “The EU chips act: Securing Europe’s supply of semiconductors”, European
Parliamentary Research Service, Vol. EU Legislation in Progress Briefing,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2022/733596/EPRS-Briefing-733596-
EU-chips-act-V2-FINAL.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[86]
European Chamber of Commerce in China and Mercator Institute for China Studies (2021),
Decoupling: Severed Ties and Patchwork Globalisation.
[23]
European Commission (2022), A New Innovation Agenda, Communication from the Commission
to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and
the Committee of the Regions, COM(2022) 332 final, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52022DC0332&from=EN (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[43]
European Commission (2022), “European Chips Act: Factsheet”, https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/european-chips-act-factsheet (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[87]
European Commission (2022), European Chips Act: Staff Working document, Commission Staff
Working Document SWD(2022) 147 final, https://digital-
strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/european-chips-act-staff-working-document (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[82]
European Commission (2022), Recovery and Resilience Scoreboard Thematic Analysis:
Research and Innovation.
[42]
European Commission (2022), Roadmap on critical technologies for security and defence,
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2022) 61 final,
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/com_2022_61_1_en_act_roadmap_security_and_
defence.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[50]
European Commission (2022), “State Aid: Commission approves up to €5.4 billion of public
support by fifteen Member States for an Important Project of Comm on European Interest in
the hydrogen technology value chain”,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_4544 (accessed on
8 March 2023).
[46]
European Commission (2021), Action Plan on synergies between civil, defence and space
industries, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2021)
70 final, https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/action_plan_on_synergies_e n.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[49]
European Commission (2021), “State aid: Commission adopts revised State aid rules on
Important Projects of Common European Interest”,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_21_6245 (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[45]
European Commission (2021), Strategic dependencies and capacities, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=SWD:2021:352:FIN (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[11]

===== PDF_PAGE 79 =====
 77
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

European Commission (2021), The landscape of Hybrid Threats: A Conceptual Model (Public
Version), Publications Office, Joint Research Centre,
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC123305 (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[47]
European Commission (2020), A New Industrial Strategy for Europe, Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2020) 102 final, https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0102&from=EN (accessed
on 6 March 2023).
[41]
European Commission (2020), Critical raw materials for strategic technologies and sectors in the
EU – a foresight study, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg,
https://doi.org/10.2873/58081.
[101]
European Commission (2020), Horizon 2020-funded security and defence R&D projects with
dual-use potential: an overview (2014-2018), Joint Research Centre Publications Office,
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/599783 (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[51]
EU-US Trade and Technology Council (2022), U.S.-EU Joint Statement,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/TTC-US-text-Final-May-14.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[106]
EU-US Trade and Technology Council (2021), “EU-US Trade and Technology Council Inaugural
Joint Statement”, Council Inaugural Joint Statement, US-EU Summit, EU-US Trade and
Technology Council (TTC), Brussels,
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/fr/statement_21_4951 (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[72]
Finkbeiner, A. and R. Van Noorden (2022), “Will war in Ukraine mark a new era for European
defence research?”, Nature, Vol. 608/7923, pp. 466-467, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-
02185-x.
[52]
G7 (2022), G7 Statement on Climate Club,
https://www.g7germany.de/resource/blob/974430/2057926/2a7cd9f10213a481924492942dd
660a1/2022-06-28-g7-climate-club-data.pdf?download=1 (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[80]
G7-Summit (2022), Annex to the G7 Science Ministers` Communiqué 2022: Further
Implementation and G7 Science Working Groups,
https://www.bmbf.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/de/2022/220613-g7-
annex.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=4 (accessed on 24 February 2023).
[79]
GAO (2021), “Science & Tech Spotlight: Deep-Sea Mining”, No. GAO-22-105507, US
Government Accounting Office, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-105507.pdf (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[110]
García-Herrero, A. and N. Poitiers (2022), Europe’s promised semiconductor subsidies need to
be better targeted, https://www.bruegel.org/blog-post/europes-promised-semiconductor-
subsidies-need-be-better-targeted (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[108]

===== PDF_PAGE 80 =====
78 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Gauß, R. et al. (2021), Rare Earth Magnets and Motors: A European Call for Action, a report by
the Rare Earth Magnets and Motors Cluster of the European Raw Materials Alliance, Berlin,
https://eitrawmaterials.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/ERMA-Action-Plan-2021-A-European-
Call-for-Action.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[100]
Goodman, M. and B. Robert (2021), “Toward a T12: Putting Allied Technology Cooperation into
Practice”, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/publication/211013_Goodman_Toward_T12.pdf?gPeOoAp9ER7mdhXQW7OWYxqga_
s133l (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[4]
Griffith, B. (2011), “Middle-Income Trap”, in Frontiers in Development Policy, The World Bank,
https://doi.org/10.1596/9780821387856_ch04.
[111]
Grünberg, N. and V. Brussee (2021), “China’s 14th Five-Year Plan – strengthening the domestic
base to become a superpower”, https://merics.org/en/short-analysis/chinas-14th-five-year-
plan-strengthening-domestic-base-become-superpower (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[35]
Guile, B. et al. (2022), “Democracies Must Coordinate Industrial Policies to Rebuild Economic
Security”, Issues in Science and Technology, No. accessed 30 August 2022,
https://issues.org/coordinate-industrial-policies-democracies-economic-security-guile-tyson/
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[53]
Haramboure, A. et al. (forthcoming), Vulnerabilities in the semiconductor supply chain:
Preliminary results based on disaggregated Inter-Country Input-Output data,
http://file:///C:/Users/Fraccola_S/Downloads/CBS-WorldCafeVII_SemiconductorsOECD.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[84]
Helwig, N., E. Sinkkonen and V. Sinkkonen (2021), Strategic Autonomy and the Transformation
of the EU: New Agendas for Security, Diplomacy, Trade and Technology, FIIA,
https://www.fiia.fi/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/fiia-report-67_niklas-helwig-et-al_strategic-
autonomy-and-the-transformation-of-the-eu.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[10]
Holland, M. (2020), “Reducing the health risks of the copper, rare earth and cobalt
industries: Transition to a circular low-carbon economy”, OECD Green Growth Papers,
No. 2020/03, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/88ce1db4-en.
[109]
Huang, Y. (2022), “The Health Silk Road: How China Adapts the Belt and Road Initiative to the
COVID-19 Pandemic”, American Journal of Public Health, Vol. 112/4, pp. 567-569,
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2021.306647.
[64]
IEA (2022), Securing Clean Energy Technology Supply Chains, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/be931bdc-en.
[95]
IEA (2021), The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/f262b91c-en.
[91]
Joseph, J. et al. (2022), Stumbling bear, soaring dragon: Russia, China and the geopolitics of
global science, Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business and Government; Policy Institute at
King’s College London, https://nrs.harvard.edu/URN-3:HUL.INSTREPOS:37372501
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[19]
Kania, E. and L. Laskai (2021), Myths and Realities of China’s Military-Civil Fusion Strategy,
https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/myths-and-realities-of-chinas-military-civil-fusion-
strategy (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[39]

===== PDF_PAGE 81 =====
 79
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Lewander, J. et al. (2021), Strategic Autonomy – Views from the North, Swedish Institute for
European Policy Studies, https://www.sieps.se/globalassets/publikationer/2021/2021_1op.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[40]
Liao, C. and T. Beal (2022), The role of the G7 in mobilizing for a global recovery, Royal Institute
of International Affairs, https://doi.org/10.55317/9781784135355.
[77]
Lin, J. (2017), “Industrial policies for avoiding the middle-income trap: a new structural
economics perspective”, Journal of Chinese Economic and Business Studies, Vol. 15/1,
pp. 5-18, https://doi.org/10.1080/14765284.2017.1287539.
[104]
March, C. and I. Schieferdecker (2021), “Technological Sovereignty as Ability, Not Autarky”,
https://www.cesifo.org/DocDL/cesifo1_wp9139.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[7]
Matthews, D. (2022), “Researchers scramble to cut European dependence on Chinese rare
earth magnets”, Science Business, https://sciencebusiness.net/news/researchers-scramble-
cut-european-dependence-chinese-rare-earth-magnets (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[93]
MOST (China Ministry of Science and Technology) (2017), “China Science and Technology
Newsletter”, No. 10, 31 May 2027”, China Ministry of Science and Technology, Vol. No. 10,
http://un.china-mission.gov.cn/eng/chinaandun/201706/P020210831842639136200.pdf
(accessed on 9 March 2023).
[65]
Nakano, J. (2021), “The Geopolitics of Critical Minerals Supply Chains”, Center for Strategic and
International Studies, Washington, DC, https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-
public/publication/210311_Nakano_Critical_Minerals.pdf?DR03x5jIrwLnNjmPDD3SZjEkGEZ
FEcgt (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[99]
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2022), Protecting U.S.
Technological Advantage, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.,
https://doi.org/10.17226/26647.
[2]
National Science Board (2022), Science and Engineering Indicators 2022: The State of U.S.
Science and Engineering, National Science Board, Alexandria, VA, United States,
https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20221 (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[15]
OECD (2023), “Education Database: Enrolment of international students by origin”, OECD
Education Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/d3abd071-en (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[16]
OECD (2023), “STAN Bilateral trade database by industry and end-use category, ISIC Rev. 4”,
STAN: OECD Structural Analysis Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00691-en
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[17]
OECD (2022), OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2022 Issue 1, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/62d0ca31-en.
[13]
OECD (2022), Security of Supply for Critical Raw Materials: Vulnerabilities and Areas for G7
Coordination, G7, Schloss Elmau, Germany,
https://www.bundesregierung.de/resource/blob/974430/2059152/913f41a5d52c8aa68b1bb0e
03176879d/2022-07-01-security-of-supply-for-critical-raw-materials-data.pdf?download=1
(accessed on 9 March 2023).
[97]

===== PDF_PAGE 82 =====
80 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

OECD (2022), “The supply of critical raw materials endangered by Russia’s war on Ukraine”,
https://www.oecd.org/ukraine-hub/policy-responses/the-supply-of-critical-raw-materials-
endangered-by-russia-s-war-on-ukraine-e01ac7be/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[18]
OECD (2021), Fostering Economic Resilience in a World of Open and Integrated Markets ,
Report prepared for the 2021 UK presidency of the G7,
https://www.oecd.org/newsroom/OECD-G7-Report-Fostering-Economic-Resilience-in-a-
World-of-Open-and-Integrated-Markets.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[21]
OECD (2019), “Measuring distortions in international markets: The semiconductor value chain” ,
OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 234, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/8fe4491d-en.
[83]
OECD (2017), “China and the next production revolution”, in The Next Production
Revolution: Implications for Governments and Business, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264271036-16-en.
[31]
OECD (forthcoming), Raw materials critical for the green transition: Production, international
trade and export restrictions, OECD, Paris, OECD Publishing, https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/trade/oecd-trade-policy-working-papers_18166873 (accessed on 9 March 2023).
[116]
Politi, A. (2022), Rare Earth Elements and China, NATO Defense College Foundation, Rome,
https://www.natofoundation.org/food/rare-earth-elements-and-china/ (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[98]
Rodrik, D. (2014), “Green industrial policy”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 30/3,
pp. 469-491, https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/gru025.
[24]
Sánchez Romero, L. (2021), “China’s ban on research monkey exports hits vaccine testing”,
European Animal Research Association, https://www.eara.eu/post/china-ban-on-research-
monkey-exports-hits-vaccine-testing (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[103]
Schmidt, E. et al. (2022), Mid-Decade Challenges to National Competitiveness, Special
competitive studies project, https://www.scsp.ai/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/SCSP-Mid-
Decade-Challenges-to-National-Competitiveness.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[9]
Schwellnus, C. et al. (forthcoming), Global value chain dependencies under the magnifying
glass, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/23074957.
[96]
Science and Technology Daily (2022), “Sci-tech Cooperation with 84 BRI Countries Set up”,
http://www.stdaily.com/English/WorldNews/202203/8697175cb94f4f36a27f49a41233bc48.sht
ml (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[66]
SCSP (2022), Restoring the Sources of Techno-Economic Advantage, Economy Interim Panel
Report, https://www.scsp.ai/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Economy-Panel-IPR-FINAL-
Version.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[56]
Semiconductor Industry Association (2021), Taking Stock of China’s Semiconductor Industry,
Semiconductor Industry Association, Washington, DC,,
https://www.semiconductors.org/taking-stock-of-chinas-semiconductor-industry (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[107]

===== PDF_PAGE 83 =====
 81
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Shivakumar, S. (2022), Securing Global Standards for Innovation and Growth, Center for
Strategic and International Studies, Washington, DC, https://www.csis.org/analysis/securing-
global-standards-innovation-and-growth. (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[70]
Soare, S. and F. Pothier (2021), “Leading edge: key drivers of defence innovation and the future
of operational advantage”, https://www.iiss.org/-/media/files/research-
papers/2021/11/defence-innovation_oct-
2021_s10.pdf?la=en&hash=557B195DFA53C7CC638B1551A59A21476D042DA9 (accessed
on 6 March 2023).
[8]
Szczepański, M. (2020), Important projects of common European interest Boosting EU strategic
value chains, European Parliamentary Research Service, European Union,
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2020/659341/EPRS_BRI(2020)65934
1_EN.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[44]
Tagliapietra, S. and R. Veugelers (2020), A green industrial policy for Europe, Bruegel Blueprint
Serie, No. 31,
https://www.bruegel.org/sites/default/files/wp_attachments/Bruegel_Blueprint_31_Complete_
151220.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[28]
Tani, C. (2022), “Commission wants to plug ‘information gap’ between civilian and defence
R&D”, Science Business, https://sciencebusiness.net/news/commission-wants-plug-
information-gap-between-civilian-and-defence-rd (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[105]
Teer, J. and M. Bertolini (2022), Reaching breaking point: The semiconductor and critical raw
material ecosystem at a time of great power rivalry, https://hcss.nl/report/reaching-breaking-
point-semiconductors-critical-raw-materials-great-power-rivalry/ (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[114]
The State Administration for Market Regulation (2022), National Standardisation Development
Action Plan, https://gkml.samr.gov.cn/nsjg/bzjss/202207/t20220708_348515.html (accessed
on 7 March 2023).
[113]
The White House (2022), “Fact Sheet: Biden-⁠Harris Administration Driving U.S. Battery
Manufacturing and Good-Paying Jobs”, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2022/10/19/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-driving-u-s-
battery-manufacturing-and-good-paying-jobs/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[102]
The White House (2022), Fact Sheet: CHIPS and Science Act Will Lower Costs, Create Jobs,
Strengthen Supply Chains, and Counter China, http://, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2022/08/09/fact-sheet-chips-and-science-act-will-lower-costs-
create-jobs-strengthen-supply-chains-and-counter-china/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[57]
The White House (2022), Fact Sheet: How the Inflation Reduction Act Will Help Small
Businesses, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/12/fact-
sheet-how-the-inflation-reduction-act-will-help-small-businesses (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[59]
The White House (2022), “FACT SHEET: President Biden and G7 Leaders Formally Launch the
Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment”, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2022/06/26/fact-sheet-president-biden-and-g7-leaders-formally-
launch-the-partnership-for-global-infrastructure-and-investment/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[76]

===== PDF_PAGE 84 =====
82 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The White House (2022), “Fact Sheet: President Biden Announces the Americas Partnership for
Economic Prosperity”, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/06/08/fact-sheet-president-biden-announces-the-americas-partnership-for-
economic-prosperity (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[75]
The White House (2022), “Memorandum on the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and
Investment”, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2022/06/26/memorandum-on-the-partnership-for-global-infrastructure-and-
investment/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[78]
The White House (2022), National Security Strategy, https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/10/Biden-Harris-Administrations-National-Security-Strategy-
10.2022.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[1]
The White House (2022), Remarks on Executing a Modern American Industrial Strategy by NEC
Director Brian Deese, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/speeches-
remarks/2022/10/13/remarks-on-executing-a-modern-american-industrial-strategy-by-nec-
director-brian-
deese/#:~:text=Here's%20what%20a%20modern%20American,spur%20private%20investme
nt%20and%20innovation (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[61]
The White House (2022), “Statement on Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity”,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/05/23/statement-on-
indo-pacific-economic-framework-for-prosperity/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[74]
The White House (2021), Fact Sheet: The Bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
Creates Good-Paying Jobs and Supports Workers, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/statements-releases/2021/08/03/fact-sheet-the-bipartisan-infrastructure-investment-
and-jobs-act-creates-good-paying-jobs-and-supports-workers (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[60]
The White House (2021), “Quad Principles on Technology Design, Development, Governance,
and Use”, The White House, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2021/09/24/quad-principles-on-technology-design-development-governance-and-
use/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[73]
US Department of Commerce (2022), A Strategy for the CHIPS for America Fund, US
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC,
https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2022/09/13/CHIPS-for-America-
Strategy%20%28Sept%206%2C%202022%29.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[58]
US Department of Commerce (2022), “Commerce Implements New Export Controls on
Advanced Computing and Semiconductor Manufacturing Items to the People’s Republic of
China”, US Department of Commerce, Washington, DC,,
https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/about-bis/newsroom/press-releases/3158-
2022-10-07-bis-press-release-advanced-computing-and-semiconductor-manufacturing-
controls-final/file (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[85]
US Department of State (2022), Supply Chain Ministerial, US Department of State, Washington,
DC, https://www.state.gov/supply-chain-ministerial/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[22]
US Geological Survey (2022), Mineral commodity summaries 2022, U.S. Department of the
Interior, Reston, Va., United States, https://doi.org/10.3133/mcs2022.
[94]

===== PDF_PAGE 85 =====
 83
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Valigra, L. (2022), “US CHIPS Act expected to create ‘productive competition’ with Europe”,
Science Business, https://sciencebusiness.net/news/us-chips-act-expected-create-
productive-competition-europe (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[90]
Varas, A. (2021), Strengthening the Global Semiconductor Value Chain,
https://www.semiconductors.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/BCG-x-SIA-Strengthening-the-
Global-Semiconductor-Value-Chain-April-2021_1.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[81]
Wagner, C. and X. Cai (2022), Drop in China-USA international collaboration, ISSI Newsletter,
Vol.18/1, https://www.issi-society.org/media/1434/newsletter69.pdf (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[14]
Warwick, K. (2013), “Beyond Industrial Policy: Emerging Issues and New Trends”, OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 2, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5k4869clw0xp-en.
[25]
Wigell, M. et al. (2022), Europe Facing Geoeconomics : Assessing Finland’s and the EU’s Risks
and Options in the Technological Rivalry, http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-383-205-3
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[3]
Wigell, M. et al. (2022), Europe Facing Geoeconomics: Assessing Finland’s and the EU’s Risks
and Options in the Technological Rivalry, Report published by the Prime Minister’s Office,
Helsinki, https://www.fiia.fi/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/europe-facing-geoeconomics.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[71]
WTO (2022), The Crisis in Ukraine: Implications of the war for global trade and development ,
World Trade Organization (WTO),
https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/crisis_ukraine_e.htm (accessed on
9 March 2023).
[115]
Wu, Y. (2022), “China Standards 2035 Strategy: Recent Developments and Implications for
Foreign Companies”, China Briefing, Dezan Shira & Associates, https://www.china-
briefing.com/news/china-standards-2035-strategy-recent-developments-and-their-
implications-foreign-companies (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[69]
Xinhua News Agency (2021), “The Chinese Communist Party Central Committee and the State
Council Publish National Standardization Development Outline”, Original CSET translation,
https://cset.georgetown.edu/publication/the-chinese-communist-party-central-committee-and-
the-state-council-publish-the-national-standardization-development-outline (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[36]
Zenglein, M. and A. Holzmann (2019), “Evolving Made in China 2025 China’s industrial policy in
the quest for global tech leadership”, MERICS Papers on China, No 8, MERICS,
https://merics.org/sites/default/files/2020-
04/MPOC%20Made%20%20in%20China%202025.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[32]
Zubașcu, F. (2022), “EU to launch €11B joint undertaking on advanced semiconductors”,
Science Business, https://sciencebusiness.net/news/eu-launch-eu11b-joint-undertaking-
advanced-semiconductors (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[88]

===== PDF_PAGE 86 =====
84 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Notes
1 The chapter’s focus on these technology leaders is a pragmatic one, reflecting time and space
constraints. Further analysis should ideally include other existing technology leaders (e.g. Japan) and
emerging ones (e.g. India).
2 In the context of this chapter, “securitisation” refers to the reframing of regular policy issues, such as
climate change, migration, and emerging technologies, into matters of “security”.
3 Griffith (2011[111]) defines a middle-income trap as “a situation whereby a middle-income country is failing
to transition to a high-income economy due to rising costs and declining competitiveness.”
4 Data for the United States are for 2019.
5 Patents protect technological inventions (i.e. products or processes providing new ways of doing
something or new technological solutions to problems). IP5 patent families are patents filed in at least
two offices worldwide, including one of the five largest intellectual property (IP)offices: the European Patent
Office, the Japan Patent Office, the Korean Intellectual Property Office, the US Patent and Trademark
Office, and the National Intellectual Property Administration of People’s Republic of China.
6 This selection of economies represents 43% of global imports of intermediate products from high and
medium-high R&D-intensive activities in 2020 and 39% of such imports in 2000. However, it is unevenly
distributed among those partners: 57% of Chinese imports are represented, while only 26% of the German
imports and 38% for the United States are captured in 2020.
7 Well-known export controls include those imposed by the United States on China with regards to
semiconductors. Lesser -known examples include China’s export ban on research monkeys, which has
adversely affected biomedical research in several OECD countries (Sánchez Romero, 2021[103]).
8 Described varyingly as a “slippery slope ” (European Chamber of Commerce in China and Mercator
Institute for China Studies, 2021[23]), “downward spiral” (Brown, Gunter and Zenglein, 2021[38]), and “chain
reaction” (Wigell et al., 2022[3]), as China moves to pursue self-reliance, liberal market economies respond
by restricting China’s access to foreign technologies, further fuelling China’s self -reliance campaign
(Brown, Gunter and Zenglein, 2021[38]). The result is a decoupling into rival blocs.
9 Decoupling of the global economy would have a very costly outcome for the world and for individual
OECD members. According to WTO estimates, which are relatively modest, the disintegration of the global
economy into two blocs would reduce global GDP by 5%. The cost will not be equal to all countries, with
developing countries set to suffer the most. In a modest scenario, open markets that are geographically
close to China, and large open market s such as E.U would lose 4%; Other large markets would lose only
1% (WTO, 2022[115]).
10 This OECD has developed a new experimental methodology for reporting industrial policy expenditure
in a comparabl e way across countries . It will gather harmonised data on industrial policy expenditures,
their composition, and their mode of delivery. See (Criscuolo, Lalanne and Díaz, 2022[112]).
11 According to (Lin, 2017[104]), the middle-income trap arises from a middle-income country's failure to
achieve faster productivity growth through technological innovation and industrial upgrading when
compared to high-income countries.

===== PDF_PAGE 87 =====
 85
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

12 Based on available data, (DiPippo, Mazzocco and Kennedy, 2022[27]) use nine categories of instruments
to estimate China’s industrial policy spending: direct subsidies to firms , R&D tax incentives, other tax
incentives, government-financed business R&D, below -market credit to state-owned enterprises (SOEs),
state investment funds (government guidance funds), below -market land sales to firms, implied credit
advantage among SOEs for their large net payables balances and debt-equity swaps.
13 The European Innovation Council, while a new initiative, is part of the wider Horizon Europe programme.
See https://eic.ec.europa.eu/about-european-innovation-council_en.
14 The EDF has adopted Horizon Europe tools, so that the two funds are becoming increasingly similar in
how they are run, which opens opportunities for collaboration . Important d ifferences remain , howe ver,
since EDF involves national ministries of defence in its projects. Projects and participating firms are also
subject to a number of security requirements and a higher level of control and oversight of research (Tani,
2022[105]).
15 https://beta.nsf.gov/tip/latest.
16 (Chen, 2019[67]) states that by 2019, the Chinese Academy of Sciences had built 9 overseas science
and education centres in BRI countries and trained nearly 5 000 people, including 1 500 with master's and
doctoral degrees in science and engineering. Co -operation included more than 100 scientific and
technological projects to support sustainable development in BRI countries, and collaboration with more
than 100 high-tech enterprises and research institutions to establish the BRI Alliance to serve regional
economic and social development goals.
17 See the ANSO website (http://www.anso.org.cn) for more details.
18 China recently followed up this strategy with two implementation documents: the National
Standardisation Development Outline in 2021 ( see (Xinhua News Agency, 2021 [36]) and the National
Standardisation Development Action Plan in (2022[113])).
19 These include organisations like the International Telecommunication Union, the Instit ute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, the International Organization for Standardization and the International
Electrotechnical Commission.
20 For example, Working Group 1 is charged with co-ordinating and co-operating on critical and emerging
technology standards. In 2022, it established the “Strategic Standardisation Information ” mechanism to
take co-ordinated action if standardisation a ctivities pose a challenge to EU-US strategic interests and
values (EU-US Trade and Technology Council, 2022[106]).
21 See the website of the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs
(https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/100347806.pdf).
22 The member countries are Australia, Brunei Darussalam, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, the United States and Vietnam.
23 https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/stronger-europe-world/global-gateway_en.
24 Further upstream, the supply chains for critical minerals/materials in chips is also global and dominated
by countries like China and Russia (Teer and Bertolini, 2022 [114]). Critical minerals are discussed in the
sub-section that follows.
25 Chip design is also quite concentrated , with US chip design companies outsourc ing production but
retaining their design activities.

===== PDF_PAGE 88 =====
86 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

26 Chip design is the most R&D-intensive segment in the semiconductor supply chain (65% of total industry
R&D), while fabrication is the most capital-intensive (64% of total industry capital expenditure) (European
Commission, 2022[82]).
27 According to analysis by the (Semiconductor Industry Association, 2021 [107]), the Chinese government
has long had an industrial policy to support its nascent chip industry, but these efforts accelerated in 2014
with the release of the National Guideline for the Promotion and Development of the IC Industry , which
laid out ambitious targets for industry revenue, production capacity and technological advances in
integrated circuits . In 2015, Made in China 2025 set aspirational goals for China to achieve 70% self -
sufficiency in semiconductors by 2025. Central to China’s semiconductor industrial policy is the National
Integrated Circuit s Industry Development Investment Fund , established in 2014 with USD 21 billion in
state-backed financing and renewed in 2019 for a second round of state financing exceeding
USD 35 billion. Around two-thirds of this funding has targeted front-end manufacturing, with the goal of
increasing China’s share of global semiconductor production. Other funds, including from regional
governments (estimated at USD 25 billion), and other forms of intervention, including government grants,
equity investmen ts and low-interest loans (estimated at over USD 50 billion), further support China’s
semiconductor companies.
28 This focus on promoting manufacturing is not without its critics. For example, (García-Herrero and
Poitiers, 2022 [108]) argue that the proposals in the European Commission’s European Chips Act over -
emphasise semiconductor production subsidies and do not focus enough on increasing value -added in
research.
29 Rare earths are a family of 17 elements comprising 15 elements in the lanthanides group (ranging from
lanthanum to lutetium), plus scandium and yttrium.
30 Substantial amounts of energy , as well as caustic and other hazardous substances, are used in the
creation of refined rare -earth metal. Extract ion also results in the release of other harmful compounds,
such as the radioactive elements thorium and uranium, which are commonly found in mine tailings and
other waste dumps (Holland, 2020[109]).
31 According to (Nakano, 2021[99]), China’s consumption of rare-earth minerals grew at an average annual
rate of 7.5% b etween 2004 and 2014 while the rare -earth mineral consumption of the rest of the world
decreased by 3.8%, raising China’s share of global consumption from 43% to 70%.
32 New OECD analysis suggests export restrictions may be playing a non -trivial role in international
markets for critical raw materials, affecting availability and prices of these materials. OECD countries have
been increasingly exposed to the use of export restrictions for critical raw materials . Such restrictions are
also on the increase. For example, China increased the number of its restrictions by a factor of 9 over the
period 2009 -2020, making it the country with the largest number of restrictions in 2020 (OECD,
forthcoming[116]).
33 Palladium is a central component of vehicle catalytic converters that remove toxic emissions from
exhaust fumes, while nickel is used in electric-vehicle batteries.
34 For example, the ocean floor contains vast quantities of critical minerals. Growing demand is driving
technology development for exploration and extraction from deep -sea mining. However, the long-term
environmental effects from deep-sea mining are as yet unknown (GAO, 2021[110]).

===== PDF_PAGE 89 =====
 87
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The climate emergency requires nothing short of a total transformation of
sociotechnical systems in areas such as energy, agrifood and mobility. STI
has essential roles in these transformations, but governments must be
more ambitious and act with greater urgency in their STI policies to support
them. They need to design policy portfolios that enable transformative
innovation and new markets to emerge, challenge existing fossil-based
systems, and create windows of opportunity for low-carbon technologies to
break through. Larger investments and greater directionality in research
and innovation activities are required, but should coincide with a reappraisal
of STI systems and their supporting STI policies to ensure they are “fit-for-
purpose” to contribute to sustainability transitions. For example, STI policies
need to support new modes of partnership (e.g. between researchers,
businesses, governments and citizens) and develop enabling resources
(e.g. finance, skills and knowledge) conducive to tranformative change.
They also need to balance supply and demand side interventions that
target both production and consumption. The chapter outlines ten sub-
domains of STI policy where reforms are needed and highlights significant
gaps between R&D funding and net-zero ambitions.

3 Science, technology and Innovation
Policy for Sustainability Transitions

===== PDF_PAGE 90 =====
88 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Key messages
 To address the climate emergency requires nothing short of a total transformation of energy,
agrifood, and mobility systems. Science, technology and innovation (STI) have essential roles
in these transformations, but governments must be more ambitious and act with greater
urgency in their STI policies to meet these challenges.
 Governments may require altogether different STI policy frameworks and practices from those
they commonly use today to help direct and accelerate the innovation cycle for low -carbon
technologies. They should design policy mixes that enable transformative innovation and new
markets to emerge, challenge existing fossil-based systems, and create windows of opportunity
for low-carbon technologies to break through. Reforms concern all aspe cts of STI policy and
governance, and the chapter sets out a checklist of STI policy sub-domains where these are
needed.
 Significant levels of investment are needed across the entire innovation chain to meet the scale
and pace of the net-zero transition. Governments should place greater emphasis on research,
development and demonstration (RD&D), since achieving net -zero depends on technologies
that are still far from market. Government incentives for low-carbon research and development
(R&D), including publ ic R&D grants, public procurement, and carbon pricing, should also pay
greater attention to regime-changing radical innovations.
 Technological innovation is inherently uncertain, and technologies can often interact with one
another in unexpected ways. Gov ernments should diversify and pool their investments to
search, develop and deploy a portfolio of technologies, while also continuously assessing
potential trade-offs that may be created by these technologies.
 STI policies should encourage public-private partnerships and collaborative platforms operating
at different stages of the low -carbon innovation chain to accelerate the pace of radical
innovation. Wider society should also be actively engaged in STI processes and policies, since
technological shifts need to coincide with transformations in behaviour, lifestyles and economic
activity. Moreover, cross-government co-ordination will be essential, as policy efforts targeting
RD&D and technology deployment are distributed across many different policy areas.
 International STI co-operation is also necessary, as global climate change requires collective
action to meet net -zero targets. However, national research and innovation funding regimes
can present barriers to international co -operation that governments n eed to address. It is also
important for OECD member countries to co-operate on technological innovation with low- and
middle-income countries, where the majority of growth in greenhouse gas emissions is
expected to occur in the coming decades, but where scientific and technological capabilities for
low-carbon innovation are underdeveloped.
 Gaps in the skills and capabilities of firms, governments and research actors need to be
addressed to enact sustainability transitions rapidly. These gaps include both technological and
“softer” capabilities related to new ways of working. Addressing these gaps requires a multi -
agency approach that considers both supply- and demand-side perspectives, and also supports
people of working age and communities in attaining new skills and opportunities as part of a
just transition.
 Finally, the current knowledge and evidence base that supports policy decisions, such as
evaluation and statistics, struggles to cope with the complexity and uncertainty of STI -
enabled sustainability transitions. Governments need to invest in their “strategic
intelligence” capabilities to monitor and evaluate sociotechnical transitions, and to
formulate, design and implement effective STI policy agendas and measures.

===== PDF_PAGE 91 =====
 89
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Introduction
Sociotechnical systems in areas like energy, agrifood and mobility need to transform rapidly to become
more sustainable and resilient, which will require simultaneous political, economic, behavioural, cultural
and technological change, at multiple levels of governance (OECD, 2015[1]). STI has essential roles in
these transformations, but governments must be more ambitious and act with greater urgency in their
STI policies to meet these challenges.
Along these lines, the OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021 argued for reforms of STI
policy that favour greater directionality in support of sustainability transitions. It also suggested that the
disruptive COVID-19 moment offers a “window of opportunity” to enact reforms, particularly in the context
of ambitious recovery packages and renewed commitments to address climate change (OECD, 2021[2]).
Governments may require altogether different policy frameworks and practices from those they commonly
use today. Reforms will require revisiting STI policy models, visions, targets and instruments with a view
to adapting them or displacing them in favour of others (Schwaag Serger an d Palmberg, 2022 [3]). All
aspects of STI policy and governance are involved, including research and innovation funding, human
resources for science and technology, research and technology infrastructures, STI system co -ordination
mechanisms, and evaluation and measurement.
This chapter takes up the call for STI policy reforms and outlines those areas that need attention. It begins
by outlining shifts in STI policy, including growing recognition of the need for greater directionality and a
multilevel perspective on systems change. For STI to enable sustainability transitions, it needs to support
new modes of partnership (e.g. between researchers, businesses, governments and citizens) and develop
enabling resources (e.g. finance, skills and knowledge) con ducive to tranformative change. It needs to
balance supply and demand side interventions that target both production and consumption. The chapter
outlines ten sub -domains of STI policy where reforms are needed. For example, it highlights important
gaps between R&D funding and net -zero ambitions. A final section draws some lessons and presents a
brief outlook on STI policy for sustainability transitions.
Towards a more directive and multilevel policy approach
The pace of low-carbon innovation needs to accelerate
Without a major acceleration in low -carbon innovation, reaching net ‑zero emissions by 2050 will be
unachievable. For example, in the energy sector, achieving net-zero emissions by 2050 will require nothing
short of the complete transformation of the global energy system. Instead of fossil fuels, two-thirds of total
energy supply in 2050 will be from wind, solar, bioenergy, geothermal and hydro energy in the International
Energy Agency’s (IEA) “Net-zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario” (NZE). Reaching this target requires rapid
large-scale deployment of available technologies, such as wind and solar, as well as the development and
widespread use of technologies that are far from mature today, such as green hydrogen. It also requires
behavioural change.1 Figure 3.1 shows that technologies that are available on the market today provide
nearly all the emissions reductions required by 2030 in the NZE. However, by 2050, almost 50% of carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions reductions in the NZE come from technologies currently at the demonstration or
prototype stage, a share that is even higher in heavy industry (IEA, 2022[4]).

===== PDF_PAGE 92 =====
90 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 3.1. Global CO2 emissions changes by technology maturity category in the IEA’s NZE

Source: IEA (2021), Net Zero by 2050, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zero-by-2050 (accessed on 15 December 2022)
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/q2yln1
The urgency to achieve net -zero by 2050 points to the need to compress the innovation cycle for early -
stage clean-energy technologies. In the IEA’s NZE, most clean -energy technologies that have yet to be
demonstrated at scale today would need to reach markets by 2030 at the latest. This is a much more rapid
pace of development than has typically been achieved historically and places new demands on innovation
systems, and by extension, on government policy. Innovation chains are fragile by nature, facing mul tiple
“valleys of death” that can disrupt the flow of the “innovation pipeline”. Many governments already try to
deal with these, often playing wide-ranging roles in supporting innovation chains.
The sustainability challenge calls for greater directionality in policy making
It is widely understood that sustainability transitions require a whole-system change, for example, in energy
systems and agrifood systems. While research and innovation have critical roles to play in reconfiguring
these systems, other factors are essential, including current social practices, institutions, infrastructures,
and markets (Kern, 2012[5]). Sustainability transitions are therefore “sociotechical”, insofar as technologies
and societies co -evolve to meet the sustainability challenge. The breadth of change implies that firms,
governments, public research actors and societies more broadly need to adapt. These actors have their
own plans, strategies and agendas that shape the course of transitions. This creates complexity,
uncertainty and ambiguity, so that the course of sociotechnical transitions remains impossible to predict
and difficult to direct.
Shared goals and co -operation between different parts of the system can help reduce uncertainty and
ambiguity, as multiple actors work towards common goals and solutions. An increasingly important focus
of STI policy, therefore, is to help develop and articulate these common goals among diverse stakeholders.
In this view, the traditional rationales for STI policy – fixing market failures and system failures – are joined
by a further rationale – fixing directionality failures – which implies STI should support purposeful transitions
(Weber and Rohracher, 2012[6]).
Directionality is implicit in all policy making by design, of course, but fixing directionality failures in
STI systems presents a break from the recent orientation of STI policy, where, over the last couple of
decades, the STI policy mix has become more horizontal and agnostic on the research and technologies
Activity
Activity
BehaviourMature Mature
Market uptake
Market uptakeDemonstration
Demonstration
Large prototype
Small prototype
Net reductions
Net reductions
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
2030 2050
Activity Behaviour On the market: Mature On the market: Market uptake
Under development: Demonstration Under development: Large prototype Under development: Small prototype Net reductions
Gt CO2

===== PDF_PAGE 93 =====
 91
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

it supports. 2 This is now challenged by the sustainability imperitive and the broader “securitisation” of
STI policies discussed in Chapter 1, which are adding pressure on governments to make their STI policies
more directive. Along these lines, governments are experimenting with new policy instruments, such as
challenge-based funding and mission -oriented innovation policies (MOIPs) that bring together multi ple
actors, including firms and public-sector research organisations, to co-create and collaborate on pathways
to net-zero (see Chapter 5).
Efforts like these can help “build up” and develop new structures, practices and technologies that contribute
to sustainability transitions. Governments can use public policies to develop spaces for experimentation,
notably through support for public R&D, but these spaces can extend to pilots, living labs, regulatory
sandboxes (Attrey, Lesher and Lomax, 2020 [7]) and other demonstrators that help develop alternative
sustainable solutions, technologies, services, organisational processes and institutional practices. Public
policies can also help scale up and anchor sustainable practices and solutions, including through subsidies
or public procurement that promote low -carbon technology deployment. Figure 3.2 outlines an extended
list of instruments commonly used to promote research and innovation activities; Box 3.1 highlights some
of the most common STI policy instruments used to address net-zero.
Figure 3.2. List of policy instruments commonly used in STI policy

Source: EC-OECD STIP Compass, https://stip.oecd.org.

===== PDF_PAGE 94 =====
92 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 3.1. “STI policies for net-zero” portal
To coincide with the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26), the OECD and the IEA
joined forces in 2021 to launch the “STI policies for net-zero” portal as part of the EC-OECD STIP Compass
infrastructure. The portal aims to support a better appreciation of the full landscape of STI policies targeting
net-zero, which would benefit policy mix design, policy learning and, ultimately, policy coherence across
governments. It provides information on hundreds of STI polices that explicitly support the transition to net-
zero. The portal pre sents policy information in a series of interactive dashboards that provide both an
overview of policy landscapes and options to obtain details on specific policy initiatives.
As of September 2022, the portal includes information on approximately 370 STI policy initiatives targeting
net-zero in the energy sector. These policies come from 40 countries and the European Union, and involve
around 180 government ministries and agencies. As Figure 3.3 shows, many of these initiatives use project
grants for public research. Other commonly used instruments include national strategies, agendas and
plans, grants for business R&D and innovation, and support for networking and collaborative platforms.
Figure 3.3. Top 5 STI policy instruments reported in “STI policies for net-zero” portal

Source: EC-OECD (2021), STIP Compass: International Database on Science, Technolog y and Innovation Policy (STIP), September 2022
edition, https://stip.oecd.org/stip/net-zero-portal.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/tnj2zx
At the same time, sustainability transitions require the “breakdown” and discontinuation of unsustainable
practices and structures, including the phase -out of polluting and high -carbon technologies (Kivimaa and
Kern, 2016[8]). Without this breakdown, innovation experiments are often blocked from scaling up, since
various lock-ins and path dependencies tend to preserve and protect incumbent fossil-based technologies
and practices. 3 For example, other policies such as fos sil-fuel subsidies support the stability of
unsustainable sociotechnical systems and need to be phased out, but doing so is politically difficult. While
governments need to reduce support to unsustainable and typically dominant technologies, they must also
account for and mitigate the unintended social consequences that might result. For this reason, and to
reduce the likelihood of resistance to transitions, transitional strategies need to incorporate adjustment
measures, such as phased tightening of regula tions, financial compensation, workforce retraining and
regeneration programmes for disadvantaged regions (Geels et al., 2017[9]).
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
Institutional funding for public research
Networking and collaborative platforms
Grants for business R&D and innovation
Strategies, agendas and plans
Project grants for public research
Number of initiatives in the net-zero portal

===== PDF_PAGE 95 =====
 93
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

It is through the duality of these “buildup” and “breakdown” dynamics that sociotechnical transitions
emerge.4 In addition, the broader landscape of exogenous developments (e.g. slow-moving socio -
economic trends) or shocks (e.g. elections, economic crises and wars) can trigger the destabilisation of
the existing sociotechnical system and open up “windows of opportunity” for new low -carbon innovations
to break through (Geels and Schot, 2007 [10]). This “multilevel perspective”, which is increasingly popular
as a policy mode l for promoting sustainability transitions, 5 is summarised in Figure 3.4. Its key insight is
that transitions occur through the alignment of mutually reinforcing processes within and between the three
levels of build-up of “niche innovations”, the breakdown of existing sociotechnical “regimes” and changes
in the broader exogenous la ndscape. The resulting sociotechnical transitions go beyond the adoption of
new technologies and include investment in new infrastructures, establishment of new markets,
development of new social preferences, and support for people of working age and commu nities in
attaining new skills and opportunities as part of a “just” transition (Geels et al., 2017[9]).
Figure 3.4. Promoting innovations to take advantage of windows of opportunity

Note: The multilevel perspective (MLP) sees system transitions as driven by interactions between three analytical levels: (i) the sociotechnical
system itself, which is stabilised by lock -in mechanisms (such as sunk investme nts, core competencies, and institutional commitments) but
experiences incremental improvements along path-dependent trajectories; (ii) niche innovations, which differ radically from the dominant existing
system but are able to gain a foothold in particula r geographical areas or market niches, or with the help of targeted policy support; and
(iii) exogenous (“landscape”) developments such as slow -changing trends (e.g. demographics and ideologies) or shocks (e.g. elections,
economic crises and wars) that des tabilise the system and facilitate the breakthrough of niche innovations. Instead of single drivers or a
privileging of techno-economic factors, the MLP’s key point is that transitions come about through the alignment of processes within and between
these three levels.
Source: (Geels et al., 2017[9]).

===== PDF_PAGE 96 =====
94 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Such alignments are difficult, if not impossible, to plan in a top -down manner, and transitions depend on
multiple, often independent actions occurring at different levels that are galvanised by a shared common
vision. These actions should be mutually supportive and create an “ambition loop” for technology
development and deployment, initiating a positive feedback cycle in which policy reallocates finance
towards low-carbon technologies, businesses innovate, technologies improve, and social support for the
transition grows, enabling the next round of policies to move the transition forward (IEA, IRENA and
UNFCCC, 2022[11]). This acceleration of sociotechnical transitions can be triggered by “positive tipping
points” (Tàbara, 2021 [12]; Sharpe and Lenton, 2021 [13]) that reinforce feedbacks and virtuous cycles of
subsequent transformative change (Box 3.2).6 Public policies can enable positive tipping points, creating
the spark for their initiation and the conditions for them to cascade through sociotechnical systems
(SYSTEMIQ, 2023[14]).
Box 3.2. Enabling positive tipping points for sustainability transitions
Limiting global warming to well below 2 degrees Celsius (°C) requires rapid acceleration in
sociotechnical transitions. There are plausible grounds for hope that tipping points can be activated to
propagate rapid change through complex systems. This is because change in complex systems is often
non-linear, and caus e and effect do not have to be proportionate. A tipping point converts a small
change in input to a large change in outcome, so that when a tipping point is crossed, highly
disproportionate change can occur.
Positive feedback effects dominate the dynamics of a complex system at a tipping point, driving change
upwards. In interconnected complex systems, the activation of one tipping point can sometimes raise
the possibility of another at a greater scale. This is referred to as an “upward -scaling tipping cascade”.
Such cascades can induce rapid change on a broad scale, and several previous sociotechnical
transitions began with disruptive technology innovations in niches that cascaded upwards through
tipping points to society-wide transformation.1 Any tipping point that gives a new technology a significant
advantage, such as increased market share, easier access to finance or broader social acceptance, is
likely to amplify its impact.2
Looking ahead, policy makers could activate tipping points and tipping casca des to meet climate -
change targets. Policy may make a significant difference by investing in R&D for low -carbon
technologies, diverting support from incumbents to disruptors, and reconfiguring markets and
institutions. A more deliberate search for tipping points and tipping cascades could identify opportunities
to accelerate decarbonisation, offering plausible grounds for hope that net -zero targets could still be
met. Moreover, small groups of countries with sufficient political or economic clout in a given sector may
be able to drive global change by co-operating on activating tipping cascades.
1. For example, citing (Sharpe and Lenton, 2021[13]), “the invention and refinement of the steam engine triggered a massive expansion of
coal mining and the creation of a rail transport network, propelling the industrial revolution in England. At the start of th e twentieth century,
the transition from horse-drawn carriages to fossil-fuelled cars happened in just over a decade in US cities.”
2. In a recent example, more than 50% of new vehicles now bought in Norway are electric, where progressive tax policies have made electric
vehicles cheaper than petrol cars (Sharpe and Lenton, 2021[13]).
Source: (Sharpe and Lenton, 2021[13]).
Governments need to develop governance and institutional capacities to per form these buildup and
breakdown tasks, exploit windows of opportunity in the broader sociotechnical landscape, search for
opportunities to trigger tipping cascades and promote just transitions. These capacities are broad in scope
and refer to the ways gov ernments set directions and choose priorities; how they develop and maintain
relationships with other actors in the innovation system, especially large R&D -performing firms; and how
they learn, for example, through monitoring and evaluation. The crosscutti ng nature of sociotechnical

===== PDF_PAGE 97 =====
 95
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

transitions means these capacities should not be concentrated in a single ministry or agency, but widely
distributed across government.
Promoting sustainability transitions in STI policy sub-domains
Sustainability transitions in sociotechnical systems like energy, food and transport depend on the
development and deployment of enabling technologies. These, in turn, depend on well -functioning
STI systems to generate relevant scientific knowledge and technologies at pace and at scal e. Larger
investments and greater directionality in research and innovation activities are needed, but these should
coincide with a reappraisal of STI systems and their supporting STI policies to ensure they are “fit -for-
purpose” to contribute to sustainab ility transitions. This reappraisal is perhaps best done at the level of
policy “sub-domains” that constitute the broad STI policy mix. These are shown in Figure 3.5 and include
various types of enabling resources (i.e. funding and finance, research and technical infrastructures,
enabling technologies, skills and capabilities, various framework conditions and an evidence base to
support decision -making) and a range of relationships in STI systems (i.e. between STI and society;
between the public, private and non -profit sectors; across different parts of government; and at the
international level). System thinking can help identify and understand critical linkages, synergies and trade-
offs between these sub-domains that are frequently treated separately.
Figure 3.5. Key challenges for STI policy in promoting sustainability transitions

Source: OECD S&T Policy 2025 project website, https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/stpolicy2025/, accessed on 15 November 2022.
The sections that follow consider the prospects for transition-enabling reforms in these ten policy sub -
domains. Given the systemic and multilevel aspects of sociotechnical systems, policy reforms will need to
cut across these sub-domains, since many reform opportunities depend on progress in other sub-domains.
Appreciating these interdependencies is essential and should empower policy makers to better recognise
policy constraints and identify leverage points where they could act to unblock transition barriers.

===== PDF_PAGE 98 =====
96 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

STI funding and finance for sustainability transitions
Public research funding
While public investments in energy and environment R&D have increased in recent years ( Figure 3.6),
their growth will need to accelerate if technological developments are to keep pace with meeting net -zero
targets. Sustainability transitions require transformational levels of investment over a long period, covering
all parts of the innovation chain. The IEA estimates that the global public investment of its member
countries on energy R&D and demonstration (RD&D) in 2021 was almost USD 23 billion (US dollars), most
of which was targeted at low-carbon technologies. The annual increase of 5% was lower than the annual
average of 7% from 2016 to 2020. Energy RD&D expenditure by the People’s Republic of China (hereafter
China) grew more than 2.5 times over 2015-21 (Figure 3.7), and China is estimated to be slightly ahead of
the United States in public energy RD&D spending. 7 While these increases can be viewed positively, the
levels of expenditu res as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) are still less than half those of
the late 1970s, when countries invested heavily in RD&D to deal with oil price shocks ( Figure 3.8). The
climate emergency is a larger challenge requiring arguably similar ambitious levels of investment.
Figure 3.6. Government R&D budget trends, 2016-21

Source: OECD R&D statistics, September 2022. See OECD MSTI Database, http://oe.cd/msti for most up-to-date OECD indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/psvk9t
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Energy and Environment Health and medical sciences Total Government R&D budgets
Constant price PPP USD, Index 2018=100

===== PDF_PAGE 99 =====
 97
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 3.7. Key players in the global landscape
Global public low-carbon energy RD&D budget, 2015-21

Source: IEA, Global public low-carbon energy RD&D budget, 2015-2021, IEA, Paris, https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/charts/global-public-
low-carbon-energy-rd-and-d-budget-2015-202, (accessed on 4 December 2022)
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/4z897g
Figure 3.8. Low-carbon public RD&D expenditures in GDP across IEA member countries, 1974-2021
Percentage of GDP

Note: 2021 is estimated data. Data from 2016 for the United States are estimated. The “Others” category includes hydrogen and fuel cells, other
power and storage technologies, and other crosscutting technologies and research. See https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-
product/energy-technology-rd-and-d-budget-database-2. IEA member countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republ ic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealan d, Norway,
Poland, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Türkiye, United Kingdom, United States.
Source: OECD calculations based on IEA, RD&D Budget, IEA Energy Technology RD&D Statistics (database), https://www.iea.org/data-and-
statistics/data-product/energy-technology-rd-and-d-budget-database-2, (IEA, 2023 [15]) and OECD National Accounts Statistics (database),
(OECD, 2023[16]) (accessed on 17 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/zjkplh
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
North America Japan Korea Australia New Zealand Europe China Rest of World
2021 billion USD
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
 Energy efficiency Renewables Nuclear Other%

===== PDF_PAGE 100 =====
98 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

As well as increasing levels of RD&D expenditures, governments need to consider the ways their
investments are made and which parts of the innovation chain they target. Governments remain th e main
investors in fundamental discovery research, but this needs to be more solutions -focused and directed
towards generating new knowledge and low -carbon technologies. This requires integrating expertise and
insights from different disciplines and diffe rent sectors of society, as well as more inter - and
transdisciplinary research (see Chapter 4). Such research is not currently mainstreamed and is poorly
incentivised in academic research and assessment processes. While most countries are implementing
policy initiatives to promote inter - and transdisciplinary research, and some pockets of excellence are
emerging, these need to be urgently and substantially scaled up to support transitions to more sustainable
socio-economic development pathways (OECD, 2020[17]).
A critical part of the climate innovation policy package is to close the funding gap for large -scale
demonstration projects. The amount of funding needed is very significant, particularly in the industry
sector.8 The IEA estimates that at least USD 90 billion in public funding is needed globally by 2026 for
demonstration projects in clean-energy technologies for these to be commercially ready by 2030 and help
deliver net-zero emissions by the middle of the century (IEA, 2022[4]). Some progress is being made in this
regard, with governments supporting major RD &D projects through their COVID -19 recovery packages
(Box 3.3), as well as through a new generation of gr een industrial policies – including the US Inflation
Reduction Act and Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act , the EU Innovation Fund, Japan’s Green
Innovation Fund and China’s 14th Five-Year Plan – with an increasing focus on heavy industry; hydrogen;
carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS); and other critical energy technologies (see Chapter 2).
More specifically, the United States Government launched the Clean Energy Technologies Demonstration
Challenge9 in mid -2022 to meet the IEA’s USD 90 billion target, an amount that was surpassed a few
months later after several countries and the European Commission committed to making large
contributions during the Global Clean Energy Action Forum in Pittsburgh in S eptember 2022.10
Box 3.3. Will post-COVID-19 recovery packages accelerate low-carbon innovation?
The recovery packages adopted in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic constitute a unique opportunity
to accelerate th e transition to a low -carbon economy. To assess the impact of recovery spending
specifically on low -carbon technologies, the OECD is building the Low -carbon Technology Recovery
Database (LTRD). The LTRD currently covers 14 countries within the project’s scope of OECD, Group
of Twenty (G20) and EU member countries. Combined, these countries represent 66% of global GDP
and 53% of global annual CO2 emissions. The final database, which will be released later in 2023, will
include 52 countries.
According to the data gathered so far, a total of USD 1.2 trillion in funding for recovery packages has
targeted low -carbon technologies. Half of the funding within the LTRD has been directed at the
transportation sector and around one -third to energy generation, transmis sion or distribution. Around
85% of the measures target the deployment phase, and 15% the RD &D phase. Compared to the
recovery packages following the 2007-08 Global Financial Crisis, the response to the COVID -19 crisis
appears to have placed more emphasis on RD&D.
Among low-emission technologies that are still in the early stages of innovation and where significant
investments in RD&D projects are necessary, hydrogen has been the main priority (especially in the
United States, France and Germany), followed by CCUS and smart grids. Relatively small fractions of
recovery packages are dedicated to nuclear innovation, zero -emission buildings and large -scale
storage technologies.
The analysis shows that while recovery packages make a welcome contribution to clos ing the
investment gap, they fall short of the substantial low -carbon technology investments requirements to

===== PDF_PAGE 101 =====
 99
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

An important policy question is how much to spend on deployment of existing technologies compared to
RD&D. The answer depends on the relative intensity of market failures associated with technology
development, mainly knowledge spillovers at the RD&D stage and learning-by-doing at the diffusion stage.
The relative importance of deployment support (market pull) vis -à-vis RD&D support (technology push)
should increase with the movement from highly immature technologies towards technologies close to
market com petitiveness. Patent and trademark filing data can be used as one proxy among others to
explore the relative effort assigned to RD&D and deployment (OECD, forthcoming[19]). Figure 3.9 shows
that after a period of strong growth between 2006 and 2012, patenting in climate-related technologies has
declined recently as a share of total patenting. This is mostly on account of higher growth in patenting in
other technology areas, but also because of a sharp decline in climate-related technology patenting at the
Japan Patent Office. Figure 3.9 also shows that, by contrast, the proportion of trademarks covering climate-
related goods and services has grown markedly over the last two decades, a positive sign of success in
technology diffusion and deployment. The patterns here need to be examined more closely and may differ
markedly from one jurisdiction to another, but they suggest governments need to pay greater attention to
RD&D if technologies currently at the research, development, demonstration or prototype stage are to
make it to market by 2030.11
be on track to meet the net -zero target. This overall shortfall, however, masks considerable
heterogeneity across technologies. Low-carbon technology recovery funding contributes significantly to
closing the investment gap for electric vehicles, CCUS and nuclear power; it is substantial for energy
efficiency, clean-fuel supply (hydrogen), electricity network and renewables; but it is marginal in electric
vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure and negligible in battery energy storage.
In short, while post -COVID stimulus packages have oriented investment towards sectors and
technologies key for the low-carbon transition, they cannot by themselves close the investment gap as
needed by 2030. They must now be accompanied by more ambitious complementary climate policies
that would induce private investment and trigger the deeper structural changes made necessary by net-
zero targets and the current fossil-fuel energy price crisis.
Note: These are preliminary findings of ongoing research on the impact of recovery packages announced in response to the COVID -19
pandemic on the development and diffusion of low -carbon technologies. The final results of this work are intended for publication later in
2023.
Source: (Aulie et al., 2022[18])

===== PDF_PAGE 102 =====
100 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 3.9. Patent filings and trademark registrations in climate-change mitigation and adaptation
(CCMA) technologies
Percentage of total patents and trademarks

Note: Data refer to patents filed at the European Patent Office (EPO), the Japan Patent Office (JPO) and the United States Patent and Trademark
Office (USPTO). Patents in climate change mitigation or adaptation (CCMA) are identified using the Y02 tag of the Cooperative Patent
Classification (CPC). For trademarks, data refer to trademarks fil ed at the EU Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO), the JPO, and the USPTO.
CCMA trademarks are identified using keyword searches in the goods and services description of the trademarks. For a definiti on of CCMA
technologies, see (Aristodemou et al., 2022[20]).
Source: OECD, STI Micro-data Lab: Intellectual Property Database, http://oe.cd/ipstats, February 2023 (accessed on 9 February 2023).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/pxc7e0
Public funding of business R&D and innovation
Businesses account for the largest share of expenditures on R&D in most OECD countries and are the
main performers of innovation activities.12 Governments vary in the level of support th ey offer businesses
to encourage them to perform R&D and innovate. They also vary in the policy instrument portfolio they use
(Figure 3.10). There has been considerable change in the business R&D support policy mix over the last
two decades, with a near-universal shift from direct support instruments to a greater reliance on R&D tax
incentives. Across OECD countries, R&D tax incentives represented aroun d 60 % of total government
support for business R&D in 2019, compared to 36% in 2006 (Figure 3.11).
A. Share of CCMA in total patents B. Share of CCMA in total trademarks
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
EPO JPO USPTO
% of total patents
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
EUIPO JPO USPTO
% of total trademarls

===== PDF_PAGE 103 =====
 101
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 3.10. Direct government funding and government tax support for business R&D
As a percentage of GDP, 2006 and 2020

Note: Data on subnational tax support not available for China, Spain United States. For general and country -specific notes on the estimates of
government tax relief for R&D expenditures, please see http://www.oecd.org/sti/rd-tax-stats-gtard-ts-notes.pdf.
Source: OECD R&D Tax Incentives Database, http://oe.cd/rdtax, January 2023
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/sp9j0o
Figure 3.11. Continuing shift in government policy support mix for business R&D
Government funding of Business R&D in the OECD area, 2000-2020, normalised by GDP, 2007=100

Note: Estimates of total OECD direct funding of BERD cover OECD countries, except Costa Rica. Estimates of total OECD R&D tax support
(central government level) cover all OECD countries. Direct support estimates include government R&D grants and public procurement of R&D
services, but exclude loans and other financial instruments that are expected to be repaid in full. For general and country -specific notes on the
estimates of government tax relief for R&D expenditures (GTARD), see http://www.oecd.org/sti/rd-tax-stats-gtard-ts-notes.pdf.
Source: OECD R&D Tax Incentives Database, http://oe.cd/rdtax, January 2023 and OECD R&D statistics, September 2022. See OECD MSTI
Database, http://oe.cd/msti, for most up-to-date OECD indicators.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/bf2a7e
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
%
Direct Funding of BERD Tax Support for BERD Subnational tax Support for BERD Total 2006 (excl. subnational tax support)
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
0
50
100
150
200
250
Direct funding BERD Government Tax Relief for R&D
Government Budget Allocations for R&D Business Expenditure on R&D
2007=100

===== PDF_PAGE 104 =====
102 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

After two decades of widespread deployment, there exists broad consensus that tax incentives are more
suited, in principle, to encouraging R&D activities with near-market potential. By contrast, direct grants are
more suitable for supporting longer -term, high-risk R&D, as well as targeting specific areas that either
generate public goods or have particular ly high potential for spillovers. Both types of measures provide
useful support, but the growing urgency to deal with key societal challenges like climate change points to
the need for a more directive approach using direct measures (OECD, 2021 [2]). Large parts of such
innovation funding will likely be channelled through sectors, such as energy and transport, and STI policy
will need to co -ordinate with other parts of government to bridge various “valleys of death” acro ss
innovation chains. This shift in policy emphasis coincides with the growing use of cross -government
industrial policies, including MOIPs, which require governments to make explicit innovation policy choices,
in conjunction with other actors (notably firms), on where to focus their limited resources. At the same time,
governments need to reacquire at scale the skills and capabilities to operate the sorts of direct financing
schemes the net-zero challenge calls for.
Private financing of R&D and innovation
Even with this mix of support, government financing is insufficient to fill the funding gaps that prevent
innovations for sustainability reaching the market, and private financing must crowd in.13 For example,
venture capital is a key complement to governm ent support for technology, financing pilots and
demonstrations of innovative ideas and prospective technologies, which are often the output of
government-funded R&D. Venture capital is also important for small companies to move beyond an initial
niche market (OECD, forthcoming[19]). Yet investing in the green transition remains a challenge for private
investors for several reasons: insufficient profitability compared to investments with similar risk pro files;
difficulty assessing risks owing to information asymmetries between innovators and investors; and
challenges in meeting “internal rate of return” requirements or “return on equity” thresholds. These
imperfections in the market for capital limit the amount of private capital available for low-carbon RD&D.
The concept of “blended finance”, which initially emerged as an innovative tool in the development
community to crowd in private financing for sustainability projects in developing countries, is gai ning
traction in the STI policy field as a way to combine public and private finance across the innovation chain
(OECD, 2022[21]; Miedzinski et al., 2020[22]). It works by combining risk -mitigation tools, such as first -loss
mechanisms, with debt and equity funding to help firms cross multiple valleys of death at various stages
of the innovation cycle. Each instrument has distinctive features in terms of where the capital source comes
from, how the return to investment is to be realised, and how to mitigate the risk against the potential return.
Blended finance can help scale up private investments in R&D and innovation to better meet sustainability
challenges in both d eveloped and developing countries, and has the potential to introduce greater
directionality into STI finance.14 In particular, it can be used to help increase the amount of funding directed
to R&D and innovation for “public goods” such as clean air and wat er systems. These are areas where
there are high social returns but weak incentives to invest in STI projects with high economic and
technological risk.
Enabling technologies for sustainability transitions
Recent years have seen widespread deployment of se lected low -carbon energy technologies, notably
photovoltaics, EV batteries and wind turbines. 15 This is thanks to sharp declines in their costs – for
example, EV batteries and photovoltaics have both experienced cost reductions of 90% over the past
decade. Costs reductions have been enabled by rapid technological progress, which has been driven by
investments in R&D activities, generous subsidies (including feed -in tariffs), learning -by-doing and
economies of scale. As a result, many sources of renewable ene rgy are already cheaper than fossil fuels
(OECD, forthcoming[19]).

===== PDF_PAGE 105 =====
 103
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Future technological development prospects are uncertain and often require major investments,
particularly by the private sector. Gove rnments are assuming more interventionist roles as they seek to
compress the innovation cycle, which requires them to make technological choices. These choices are
often informed by portfolio models that seek to “spread bets” on a diversity of technologies and to avoid
technological lock -ins.16 Nevertheless, countries vary in the priority they give to different technologies
(Figure 3.12), reflecting in part historical technology commitments (e.g. as major fossil -fuel suppliers,
Norway and Mexico devote sizeable proportions of their RD&D to this area, while nuclear technologies
account for a large share of RD&D expenditures in France and other countries with large nuclear facilities).
Hydrogen and fuel cells remain modest compared to other technology areas but are the fastest -growing
area globally (Box 3.4).
Figure 3.12. Public RD&D budgets on renewable energy and other low-carbon technologies
As % of total public energy RD&D, by technology, 2020

Source: IEA, “RD&D Budget”, IEA Energy Technology RD&D Statistics (database), https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-product/energy-
technology-rd-and-d-budget-database-2 (accessed on 21 December 2022).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/gwvfht
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Energy efficiency Fossil fuels Renewable energy sources
Nuclear Hydrogen and fuel cells Other power and storage technologies
Other cross-cutting techs/research Unallocated%
Box 3.4. The big push for hydrogen
Government support for the development of low -carbon hydrogen features in the recovery plans of
several countries and is a key technology in net -zero emission scenarios by 2050. The potential of
“green hydrogen” for decarbonisation has been the subject of particular policy focus recently and may
serve as an example of the need for further innovation. Production of gr een hydrogen, i.e. hydrogen
from water and renewable electricity through electrolysis, can contribute to reducing emissions through
four channels. First, hydrogen is already a feedstock for a number of chemical products, and green
hydrogen can make this production carbon-neutral. Second, hydrogen is a promising alternative to fossil
fuels for high-temperature industrial processes in hard-to-abate sectors such as steel production. Third,
hydrogen is necessary for the development of fuel-cell vehicles and can also, in specific circumstances,
reduce emissions in the built environment by replacing natural gas. Finally, hydrogen can be used to
store energy produced from intermittent sources, thereby supporting the supply of low -cost renewable
electricity.

===== PDF_PAGE 106 =====
104 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Alongside low-carbon and sector-specific technologies, net-zero will rest on innovation in other domains.
The green and digital “twin transitions” offer the promise of leveraging digital technologies for sustainability
transitions, with technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) and the Internet of Things (IoT) underpinning
smart grids, for example (Box 3.5). Interactions between multiple innovations and sociotechnical systems
is therefore an important consideration for STI policy makers, but there may also be trade-offs to manage.
For example:
 AI-enabled products and services are creating si gnificant efficiency gains, helping to manage
energy systems and achieve the deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions needed to meet net-zero
targets. However, the computational needs of AI systems are growing, raising sustainability
concerns. The physical infrastructure and hardware, together with software – collectively known as
“AI compute” – require massive amounts of computational resources, which have their own
environmental impacts (OECD, 2022[24]).
 The bioeconomy, generally defined as economic activities based primarily on biogenic instead of
fossil resources, also offers potential solutions for finding sustainable materials and products.
Several countries have introduced national bioeconomy strategies or programme s that aim to
support the transition to a circular economy by developing materials that are easier to recycle and
reuse (Box 3.6). However, the policy landscape remains complex because of potential
sustainability trade-offs due to land and water use, and impacts on biodiversity (Philp and Winickoff,
2018[25]).

Most net-zero emission scenarios agree that hydrogen could play a pivotal role in decarbonisation at
the 2050 horizon, particularly for agriculture and industrial applications, providing cheap and abundant
renewable energy becomes available. However, in 2021, the production of green hydrogen was still
about three times more expensive than grey hydrogen (made out of natural gas through steam
reforming), even under the most favourable conditions. Major cost reductions – and the rapid
deployment they would induce – are realistic in the next 10 -20 years, but will crucially depend on
massive improvements in the cost of electrolysers (through R&D and large -scale demonstration
projects) and the availability of large volumes of cheap renewable electricity.
Against this bac kdrop, a number of countries have published national hydrogen strategies, which
contain ambitious hydrogen production targets at the 2030 horizon. These targets are a significant
improvement with respect to today’s virtually non -existent green hydrogen pro duction, but are still far
from the necessary deployment at the 2050 horizon. Moreover, these targets mostly rely more on
financial support for the deployment of new large electrolysers than on direct support for innovation. In
this context, countries will ing to support hydrogen should (i) ensure greater support for R&D in green
hydrogen and demonstration projects; (ii) ensure a sufficient supply of renewable energy where
possible, and encourage the creation of an international hydrogen market; (iii) establish clear carbon
price trajectories to provide investors with the right incentives; (iv) reduce uncertainties for investors
through regulatory action and standardisation; and (v) consider blue hydrogen (produced from natural
gas with carbon capture) as an interim solution to facilitate the transition to green hydrogen.
Source: (Cammeraat, Dechezleprêtre and Lalanne, 2022[23]).

===== PDF_PAGE 107 =====
 105
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 3.5. Digitalisation and the green transition
The digital transformation could be a key enabler for reaching cli mate goals, thanks to technologies
such as smart meters, sensors, AI, IoT and blockchain, and to digitally induced changes in business
models and consumption.
In the energy sector, demand -side management can help balance the renewable -based electricity
system. For example, AI can help forecast weather and electricity prices, mitigating intermittency
problems in the system and increasing energy efficiency. Transmission and distribution system
operators could use AI for real-time decision support (OECD, 2020[26]) (OECD, 2019[27]). Similarly, IoT
devices could help buildings adapt in real time to weather conditions and prices, increasing energy
efficiency (OECD, 2016[28]).
Smart mobility will change transport demand and efficiency: “smart” traffic lights can adapt to traffic
flow, reducing air pollution and increasing energy efficiency of transport. Blockchain could help manage
the distributed grid as it facilitates decentralised consumer -to-consumer selling of electricity and
balancing supply with demand without needing a third party.
Industrial sectors will be reshaped through increased robotisation, smart manufactu ring systems,
additive manufacturing, IoT, smart appliances, sensors and AI, which can all improve energy and
material efficiency. Digital solutions are equally important on the supply side, for example by
accelerating low-carbon innovation with simulations and deep learning. Already, around 20% of patents
protecting climate-change mitigation technologies have a digital component (Amoroso et al., 2021[29]).
The increased use of digital solutions can als o change production patterns and trade, and bring
production back to some countries (“reshoring”) with better environmental performance. However,
digital technologies consume large amounts of energy, implying higher direct energy demand and
related carbon emissions, which warrant further efficiency improvements.
Source: (OECD, forthcoming[19]).

Box 3.6. Carbon management for net-zero: Bioeconomy and beyond
Net-zero carbon emissions can be achieved, in part, by a transition in how carbon is “managed”,
particularly the budget of carbon in the bioeconomy, carbon recycling and the creation of renewable
energy required for various carbon pathways. But the frequen tly used term “decarbonisation” can be
misleading as in some key economic sectors there is no alternative to carbon e.g., food and feed,
chemicals, materials and cement. The more accurate term is “de-fossilisation” that implies leaving fossil
reserves in the ground and exploiting other sources of carbon. This is the “renewable carbon” concept
which entails all carbon sources that avoid or substitute the use of any additional fossil carbon from the
geosphere.
This resonates with the circular economy concept, an overarching objective of which is to close material
loops to keep carbon circulating in the economy for as long as possible. This would break the pattern
of “take-make-dispose” that has characterised the fossil era.
The renewable carbon concept largel y supports the use of three sources of carbon as feedstocks,
namely biomass, recycled solid carbon containing waste material or industry flue gases. Strengthening
policies for reusing wastes as resources is a key action, since overly relying on biomass cou ld have
serious negative repercussions for biodiversity and food production. In the future, if the uncertainties

===== PDF_PAGE 108 =====
106 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

These examples demonstrate that technologies can contribute to transitions, but can also generate
negative externalities that STI policy should help anticipate and manage, for example, using some of the
technology governance techniques outlined in Chapter 6. At the OECD, the Global Forum on Technology
was launched in December 2022 to foster multi -stakeholder collaboration on digital and emerging
technology policy (Box 3.7), and the 2021 Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory
Governance to Harness Innovation sets norms for rethinking governanc e and regulatory policy to better
harness the societal impacts of innovation (OECD, 2021[31]).
around direct air capture (DAC) can be resolved, it may become more technically and economically
feasible and be part of the solution.
In the meantime, bioproduction, if it can utilise industrial and domestic wastes as other feedstocks,
offers promising opportunities, especially for CCU (Carbon Capture and Utilisation). CCU is effectively
a value-adding proposition compared to CCS (Carbon Captur e and Storage). Both will be necessary,
but carbon capture will create a supply chain of pure and concentrated carbon also suited for CCU.
Most CCU technologies are embryonic and there are many to choose from e.g., gas fermentation,
biochar, advanced wood -based building materials, and chemical recycling of plastics. Recent OECD
analysis demonstrates a need for hybrid technologies involving at least two different technologies.
This transition will need to be driven by public policy rather than the market as the feedstocks and
energy sources are less efficient than the incumbent fossil sources. The policy types are many and can
be arranged according to the innovation cycle. This calls for an holistic policy framework that highlights
timing and sequencing for policy makers that aligns feedstock/technology push with market pulls for a
more robust effect on the economic system.
Source: (OECD, forthcoming[30]).
Box 3.7. OECD Global Forum on Technology
International cooperation will be a cornerstone of effective emerging technology policy and governance,
but the landscape of forums with a true multi -sectoral approach has been sparse. New forums for
international cooperation on emerging technology policy are emerging. In De cember 2023, the OECD
Digital Economy Ministerial meeting gave birth to a new OECD Global Forum on Technology that aims
to provide a venue for regular in -depth dialogue to foresee and get ahead of long -term opportunities
and risks presented by technology. It aims to facilitate multi-stakeholder and values-based discussions
on specific technologies among OECD Members and partners, responding to gaps in existing fora.
Some of the other objectives include:
 Identifying and analysing specific technological developments where there are gaps in existing
fora, where societal, economic, security, and sustainability impacts are likely to be significant,
and where there are major potential implications for policy and regulatory frameworks.
 Exploring nascent approache s to policy challenges and opportunities posed by emerging
technologies and business models.
Sharing of good practices for the governance of technologies to build trust among participants and
foster common and coherent approaches based on mutual interests and democratic values.

===== PDF_PAGE 109 =====
 107
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Research and technical infrastructures
Various types of infrastructures are essential to research and technological innovation. Laboratories and
research equipment are obvious examples, but other infrastructures include those supporting open science
(e.g. digital repositories for research data) and open innovation (e.g. living labs, technology demonstrators
and extension services). Many of these infrastructures – including large public research infrastructures
(RIs) and technical inf rastructures (TIs)17 – require substantial initial outlays and must develop business
models that distribute costs and benefits in fair and sustainable ways. Challenge -oriented transitions
present them with new opportunities, for example, as sites of large d emonstration and scale-up initiatives
that are essential for sustainable transitions, but also difficulties in adapting to new constellations of actors
and their research and innovation support needs.
Historically, structural siloes and bottlenecks have posed a significant challenge to effective collaboration
between RIs and, more broadly, with potential users or partners operating in different disciplines and at
different stages of the R&D pipeline, including TIs. This came to the fore during the COVID -19 response
when established connectivity between system actors, such as those operating in basic, applied and
industrial research was critical to accelerating the advancement of scientific solutions. The complexity of
the crisis highlighted the value of cr oss-infrastructural workflows for projects that require the services of
multiple RIs and TIs. It also emphasised their status as sites of collaboration between diverse and disparate
partners, and as focal points for the development and dissemination of uni que and cutting-edge research
and data. Effective integration of crisis response capabilities into the mandates of RIs and TIs will require
a shift from prioritising short -term financial efficiency to building strategic redundancies, resilience and
long-term effectiveness. While this has a funding dimension, it also requires expertise, both for internal
operations and for benefiting the broader STI system (Larrue, 2021[32]; OECD, forthcoming[19]).
Co-operation and partnerships within innovation ecosystems
Mobilising a diverse set of actors, including businesses, governments, the scientific community and
citizens, to co -operate on transitions will be essential. Governments have a long tr adition of promoting
industry-academic links, using a mix of policy instruments, including funding, regulation, information
services and governance arrangements, to spur and deepen relations. Governments increasingly use
challenge-based funding and MOIPs t o draw together diverse sets of actors into collaborative
arrangements that target transitions (see Chapter 5). For mission-oriented collaborative platforms, the shift
of national and international R&D programmes to more open and participatory models comes with a need
for new governance processes for knowledge transfer, including alliance management, asset sharing,
privacy, transparency, value creation and responsibility. Joint efforts between the public, private and non -
profit sectors have encountered chal lenges to data sharing, ownership and value creation. Policies can
help to share knowledge and resources, facilitate decision -making processes and align innovation with
societal needs (OECD, 2021[2]).
As technology becomes more complex, innovation is increasingly shifting towards platform -based co -
operation models. New institutional arrangements, such as collaborative platforms, are emerging to co -
ordinate a diverse set of actors across the public and p rivate sector, and create value by harnessing
platform effects. They entail a technological architecture that allows their members to innovate rapidly, but
also to collaborate with many external players who can use the platform for their own innovations. M any
governments, along with partners in industry, start-ups and civil society, are developing experimental forms
of these collaborative platforms to provide better linkages between research and innovation, and promote
commercialisation. By bringing togethe r experts from academia, industry and the philanthropic sector,
collaborative platforms are often more flexible than national regulatory frameworks when it comes to setting
technical standards for the application of technology and managing associated risks . Furthermore,
government involvement in collaborative platforms can help de -risk investment in emerging technologies
(OECD, 2021[2]).

===== PDF_PAGE 110 =====
108 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Finally, research funders in many countries are striving to promote transdisciplinary research (TDR), which
can address complex problems beyond the reach of traditional science. TDR offers a practical way to
address issues, such as sustainability transitions, that are highly contested and where stakes are high. It
is a mode of research t hat integrates both academic researchers from unrelated disciplines – including
natural sciences and social sciences and humanities – and non -academic participants to achieve a
common goal involving the creation of new knowledge and theory. Given the scale and urgency of the
human-environmental system challenges facing society, there is a strong argument that TDR needs to be
scaled up singificantly and become a mainstream modus operandi for research. This would affect both the
prioritisation of research are as and changes to funding processes, including funding criteria, peer review
and evaluation (OECD, 2020[17]).
Cross-government co-ordination for transitions
Sociotechnical transitions are complex and uncertain, requiri ng multi -agency government responses.
Cross-government linkages and policy coherence are therefore essential for transitions. However, like all
large organisations, governments struggle with co-ordination challenges, which can lead to incoherence in
the policy mix for transitions, and ultimately less policy effectiveness. This also applies to STI policies, and
the mix of support measures governments offer might not adequately match the challenge at hand or the
wider policy mix of regulation and incentives. Misalignments can be horizontal (between innovation policies
and sectoral policies), vertical (between ministries and implementing agencies), or multilevel (between
national and regional authorities).
Sustainability transitions cannot be achieved or even c hiefly driven by STI policies, although they are
certainly essential. A range of sectors contribute to greenhouse gas emissions (Figure 3.13), and sectoral
policies in areas such as energy and agriculture are expected to do much of the heavy lifting. These sectors
in many OECD countries have their own considerable STI activities and capabilities which, when taken
together, can dwarf those under the direct responsibility of research ministries and their funding agencies.
Government sectoral support covers the full range of innovation chain activities, from fundamental
research to technology demonstration, diffusion and deployment. Governments also link ac hieving net-
zero to growing industrial policy goals, where increasing the rate at which promising new technologies
enter the energy system can potentially drive future economic growth. Energy security concerns also shape
this policy agenda, for instance, t hrough concepts like “strategic autonomy” (see Chapter 2). This wider
framing therefore brings in other government policy domains, raising further co -ordination and coherence
challenges.
Figure 3.13. Greenhouse gas emissions by sector, 2019

Source: (IPCC, 2022[33]).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/zn7c4r
Power, 23%
Road transport, 10%
Steel, 5%
Agriculture and related
land use, 17%Buildings, 6%
Other transport, 5%
Other industry, 19%
Forest and other land
use, 5%
Other energy, 10%

===== PDF_PAGE 111 =====
 109
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Domain specificities are therefore important considerations for STI policy when trying to promote and
assemble configurations of actors to develop transition -enabling innovations. Sectoral STI activities
operate with their own logics, institutions and policy practices that often differ from those of mainstream
STI policy. This need not be problematic in itself, but it highlights the need for governance mechanisms
that promote strategic alignment to deal with crosscutting issues like climate change. There are no “silver
bullets”, and co -ordination failures are often caused by government budget structures, which tend to
disincentivise co-operation and often promote competition between different parts of government. Various
governance arrangements have emerged over the years to improve the overall coherence of STI policies,
programmes and instruments across a range of government departments and agencies, as well as at
different governance levels (e.g. regional, national, European Union). Among these are shared national
visions, roadmaps and missions; new regulatory model s that provide greater scope for experimentation;
sectoral technology needs assessments; joint programming between research and innovation funding
agencies; and strategic oversight by high -level cross -departmental committees. Beyond these “formal”
mechanisms, informal arrangements and conditions (e.g. the circulation of civil servants) can also promote
cross-governmental co-operation. Political leadership at the highest levels is also often a prerequisite for
a directional approach that cuts across government.
In a similar vein, the recent turn to MOIPs attempts to bundle together a range of complementary public
interventions to achieve ambitious goals for which more traditional fragmented STI policies have produced,
at best, only mixed results. These specific ”co-ordinated packages” of research and innovation policy and
regulatory measures can span different stages of the innovation cycle, from research to demonstration and
market deployment; mix supply-push and demand-pull instruments; and cut across a range of policy fields
with responsibilities for different thematic areas (Larrue, 2021 [32]). Several countries are currently
experimenting with different types of MOIPs to tackle all kinds of societal challenges, includi ng net-zero,
as outlined in Chapter 5.
Framework conditions for STI-enabled sustainability transitions
The roles science and technological innovation can play in sociotechnical transitions is shaped by a wide
range of structural and institutional factors. For example:
 The disciplinary organisation of science and the autonomy of research -performing organisations,
such as universities, all significantly shape the priorities and practices of public research and
modulate the influence of public policy interventions.
 In technological innovation, the functioning of product and labour markets, the scope of regulation
(including on carbon pricing, intellectual property, environmental protection, etc.), technical
standards, firms’ business models and geography, amon g other factors, all influence the rate and
direction of innovation. Low fossil-fuel energy prices also influence incentives for investment in low-
carbon and energy efficiency innovation, with the trend in worldwide low -carbon patent intensity
mapping closely to international oil price changes, i.e. the higher the oil price, the higher the patent
intensity in low-carbon inventions.
These framework conditions, which often have their origins outside of the immediate remit of STI policy,
can either enable or hinder sociotechnical transitions. They are important leverage points for promoting
transitions, but may also offer significant barriers and lock -in. This sub -section outlines three framework
conditions that influence low -carbon innovation, namely business dynamism, standards and carbon
pricing.
Lack of business dynamism may prevent low -carbon innovations from overtaking fossil fuel -based
incumbents and secure market shares, even if they are more efficient. Start -ups are often the vehicle
through which radical innovations enter the market, older incumbent firms often focusing on incremental
changes to established technologies. Limits to competition can therefore slow down sustainability
transitions. Concentration of market power can also be a challenge as lo ng-term investors (e.g. asset-

===== PDF_PAGE 112 =====
110 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

heavy banks, institutional investors) may favour incumbents because of perceived stable returns. Though
alternative forms of financing (e.g. business angels and venture capital) can encourage greater risk-taking,
they do not invest with a sufficiently long time horizon to drive transitions (OECD, forthcoming[19]).
Standards play key roles in shaping innovation trajectories, including in green technologies, where air
quality and waste regulation (for example) have driven developments in clean technologies such as
catalytic converters and incineration plants. Different types of standards can be used. For instance, a
performance standard sets a uniform control target for firms, but does not dictate how this target is met.
Technology-based standards specify the method, and sometimes the actual equipment, that firms must
use to comply with a particular regulation, such as by requiring that a percentage of electricity be generated
using renewable sources. In this way, standards help create demand for low -carbon innovations and
induce technological change (OECD, forthcoming[19]); also see Chapter 2.
Because carbon pollution is unpr iced by the market, there exist too few incentives for firms to develop or
deploy technologies that can reduce carbon emissions. Carbon pricing is a way to make polluters pay for
their greenhouse gas emissions, for example through a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system. By making
polluting emissions costly, carbon -pricing policies change the relative costs and benefits of competing
technologies. This can lead to the development of new technologies and processes that are more energy-
efficient and environmentally friendly. However, measures like carbon taxes are politically unpopular and
are currently set at sub -optimal levels. STI policies can help reinforce the impacts of carbon prices by
supporting innovations that lower the cost of green technologies, maki ng them competitive with existing
technologies. In this way, STI policies can partially substitute for low carbon prices, which supports the
case for even stronger STI policies (OECD, forthcoming[19]). STI policies can also help create economic
winners from the low -carbon transition, which can benefit the political acceptability of future climate
policies. From a public acceptability point of view, STI climate policies also appear to be an attractive
option. Recent research from a nationally representative population survey (Dechezleprêtre et al., 2022[34])
shows that subsidies for low-carbon technologies are systematically the most favoured climate policy
compared to carbon pricing, bans or regulations (Figure 3.14).
Figure 3.14. Share of respondents who support climate-change policies (somewhat to strongly)

Note: Policy views are elicited on a five-point scale: “Strongly oppose,” “Somewhat oppose,” “Neither support nor oppose,” “Somewhat support”
and “Strongly support.” The figure shows the share of respondents to answer: “Somewhat support” or “Strongly support.” High-income countries
participating to the survey are Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Poland, Korea, Spain, the United Kingdom and the
United States. Middle-income countries participating are Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, South Africa, Türkiye and Ukraine.
Source: (Dechezleprêtre et al., 2022[34]).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/yqblkj
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Reduction in corporate income taxes
Equal cash transfers to all households
Tax rebates for the most affected firms
Reduction in the public deficit
Cash transfers to constrained households
Cash transfers to the poorest households
Reduction in personal income taxes
Funding environmental infrastructures
Subsidies to low-carbon technologies
Middle income High income
%

===== PDF_PAGE 113 =====
 111
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Societal engagement and just transitions
An inclusive and people‑centred transition is key to the world moving rapidly, collectively and consistently
towards net‑zero emissions by mid‑century (OECD, 2021[35]). Widespread social acceptance is needed to
create legitimacy and support for strong transition policies and improve resilience against political setbacks
(Geels et al., 2017[9]). Achieving momentum to address green sociotechnical transitions will require public
support of policies that rely on technical evidence, as well as public reasoning about the future of
technology in society. Moreover, in a context of high complexity, engaging citizens in STI policy can tap
diverse sources of ideas and information, as well as help identify the real needs and concerns of different
social groups, including those that are under -represented in science, innovation and respective policy
spaces. This can promote more legitimate policy decisions that better respond to citizens’ needs, and take
into account their broader socio-economic impacts and ethical implications (see Chapter 6).
These are important considerations for a ”just” transition, whose goal is to ensure that the costs and
benefits of transitioning to a more sustainable future are shared fairly, and that no one is left behind (OECD,
2021[35]).18 This can include measures such as providing support for people of working age who may be
displaced by the low -carbon transition, investing in education and training to help people adapt to new
industries, and ensuring that marginalised communities have a voice in the transition process. 19 For
example, the European Commission has launched the Just Transition Mechanism, which mobilises around
EUR 55 billion (euros) over 2021 -27 to alleviate the socio -economic impact of the transition in the most
affected regi ons. The IEA has established the Global Commission on People -Centred Clean Energy
Transitions, which has unveiled 12 key recommendations designed to help citizens to benefit from the
opportunities and navigate the disruptions created by clean-energy transitions.20
Finally, communicating scientific uncertainties to society and being transparent about conflicting or
dissenting scientific views will continue to be a major challenge, and scientific mis- and dis-information risk
undermining the critical role that scientific knowledge and new technologies have to play in any
transformation to sustainable development. Governments, scientists and technologists need to draw
lessons from the COVID-19 experience to formulate strategies and implement measures that combat mis-
and dis -information, for example on the existence of climate change and the need for mitigation and
adaptation measures (see Chapter 4).
Strategic intelligence for sustainability transitions
Transitions call for systemic and transformative STI policie s that must act at pace under conditions of
uncertainty. They also call for different sorts of knowledge and evidence bases to inform STI policy design,
implementation, coherence and evaluation. Relevant methods include strategic foresight and technology
assessment, modelling and simulations, systems and pathways mapping, monitoring and evaluation, and
quantitative indicators development, all of which can be collectively referred to as ”strategic intelligence”.
Whether existing strategic intelligence provis ion and use are well suited to the high ambition of transition
policy agendas is doubtful. Transformative STI policies demand knowledge and evidence to support
direction-setting, experimentation and learning in contexts that are systemic, transdisciplinary , complex
and uncertain. These demands may require new or significantly adapted knowledge institutions and
infrastructures, as well as new skills and organisational capabilities – essentially a transition in the
production and use of strategic intelligence itself. A specific challenge for countries is to make sense of the
range of data available, and in particular to combine and synthesise knowledge and evidence from different
sources that have different formats and have been produced for different purposes .21 With this in mind,
several countries are in the process of developing crosscutting strategic intelligence infrastructures for
STI policies to meet the transitions challenge.

===== PDF_PAGE 114 =====
112 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Future-oriented technology analysis
Many national research ministries and fundi ng agencies have used strategic foresight in recent decades
to help them set research priorities, organise new configurations of actors, and become more agile as
organisations in times of uncertainty. The “twin transitions” challenge has seen heightened in terest in
foresight practices, as signified for example by the European Commission recently appointing a
commissioner for foresight, publishing an annual strategic foresight report since 2020 and organising a
foresight network of ministers for the future f rom EU Member States.22 Both long-term trends and drivers,
as well as disruptive events like the COVID-19 pandemic, mean existing assumptions may no longer hold
and the near -future may look considerably different from the recent past. Policy tools, such as strategic
foresight, can help shed light on possible futures. They can also indirectly reduce uncertainty by promoting
collective action around widely shared future visions, for example, on sustainability transitions (Cagnin,
Amanatidou and Keenan, 2012[36]).
Technology assessment (TA) is an evidence -based, interactive process to bring to light the societal,
economic, environmental and legal aspects and consequences of new and emerging science and
technologies. It aims to inform public opinion, help direct R&D, and act as a source of strategic intelligence
to shape policies that both promote and govern new and emerging technologies. TA is conducted for a
variety of sometimes overlapping reasons. It is deployed to anticipate the potential impacts of new and
emerging technologies, to avoid surprise and allow for risk and uncertainty management. It is also used to
guide innovation and technology development towards societal goals, by informing and shaping agenda-
setting and bringing to light key values and norms in the relationship between technology and society
(OECD, forthcoming[19]). Chapter 6 discusses TA in the context of technology governance.
Monitoring, evaluation and statistical indicators23
The emergence of transformative STI policies brings new challenges for monitoring and evaluation, since
current STI indicators and traditional evaluation approaches are unable to grasp the complexity of the
underlying transitions of sociotechnical systems. Methods that can capture system -level effects and allow
for reflexive learning and formative evaluation are needed (Janssen, 2019[37]), as are approaches that can
account for policy interactions, the engagement of multiple stakeholders, and co-ordination among different
domains and levels (Haddad et al., 2022 [38]). Since policies set priorities for transformative change,
evaluation should also capture whether the direction of innovation and change responds to societal needs.
Sociotechnical transitions are deep and wide -ranging, and many aspects are not well served by exis ting
metrics. One key challenge for building evidence is the limited capacity to bring together data on innovation
inputs with data about material flows that matter for sustainability transitions. While progressively
advancing at a general level, the data -linking agenda is not moving as fast as required by the severity of
the policy challenge and needs to go beyond the domain of economic statistics. This requires more
effective policy co -ordination and regulation to ensure there are safe spaces in which dat a that may be
deemed confidential can be safely processed and analysed to its full potential.24 Several national statistical
organisations are rising to the challenge, but the innovation perspective is still seen as residual.
The challenge straddles multiple disciplines and actors. This is therefore a shared agenda with other policy
and statistical domains that requires breaching silo mentalities while preserving some degree of
specialisation. The green transition challenge requires measurement and analysis to carefully account for
the distinct nature of micro -level indicators, as well as indicators about the emergent properties of
innovation at the local, regional, national and global systems, and their transformation. STI measurement
and policy analysis should also equip itself with the necessary tools to depict and manage uncertainty.
As policy makers use indicators as incentives to steer the green transition, a major challenge for both policy
and measurement is the tendency for generalised “greenwashing” of activity, which risks diluting the
informational content of such indicators. Policy makers need to work with indicator experts to put in place

===== PDF_PAGE 115 =====
 113
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

robust, hard -to-cheat systems, approaching the challenge strategically. The larger the (economic,
environmental, reputational) stakes, the larger the risk that biased information will displace high -quality
data and analysis.
International co-operation
International co -ordinated action can accelerate innovation, enhance economies of scale, strengthen
incentives for investment and foster a level playing field where needed. Sharing experiences between
countries and industries can reduce individual risks and accelerate progress towards viable low -carbon
solutions. Measures and commitments to deployment can accelerate e conomies of scale and the
corresponding cost reductions (IEA, IRENA and UNFCCC, 2022[11]). Given the global scale and scope of
challenges like climate change, there is a growing sense that more needs t o be done at the multilateral
level to promote technological development, deployment and diffusion. The United Nations negotiations
on climate change have established a strong consensus for action, and a large number of countries have
committed to signific ant individual actions through their nationally determined contributions (NDCs). A
great many initiatives for practical global engagement are already operating and involve governments,
businesses, international and multilateral organisations, civil society organisations, and investors. The
number and diversity of collaborative international initiatives has grown remarkably over recent years, and
many of these have already made important contributions to the progress in low -carbon transitions (IEA,
IRENA and UNFCCC, 2022[11]).
Several recent international initiatives have been launched. They include “Mission Innovation”, a global
initiative launched alongside the Paris Agreement in 2015 that aims to catal yse action and investment in
RD&D to make clean energy affordable, attractive and accessible to all countries in the next decade.
Mission Innovation brings together governments, 25 public authorities, firms, investors and academia to
work together on public -private action and investment through sector -specific ”missions” that accelerate
clean-energy innovation in critical areas. 26 Another initiative, launched during COP26 in 2021, is the
“Breakthrough Agenda”, which involves 45 countries27 that are committed to working together to accelerate
innovation and deployment of clean technologies, and making them accessible and affordable for all by
2030. The agenda is designed to help trigger tipping points (see Box 3.2) and stimulate international
collaboration involving both the public and private sectors. It focuses on five key emitting sectors of the
economy – power, road transport, steel, hydrogen and agriculture (IEA, IRENA and UNFCCC, 2022 [11]).
More recent initiatives include the proposed Group of Seven (G7) Climate Club (G7, 2022[39]), which aims
to provide an intergovernmental forum to to promote ambitious climate policy around the world, and the
OECD’s Inclusive Forum on Carbon Mitigation Approaches, which aims to facilitate multilateral dialogue
on climate-change mitigation policies (OECD, 2022[21]).
Wide access to clean technologies will require considerable technology diffusion, particularly to low - and
middle-income countries that are expected to account for the vast majority of the increase in global carbon
emissions until 2050. This is a complex issue requiring multiple interventions. A key de terminant of
international diffusion is the domestic level of technological development, or technological capabilities, in
recipient countries. The latest IPCC report (IPCC, 2022[33]) discusses the ma in challenges and possible
solutions at some length, and highlights emerging ideas for international co-operation on innovation. These
include promoting developing-country participation in technology programmes, climate -related innovation
system builders and the creation of universities in developing countries that play the role of central hubs
for capacity-building, as well as encouraging sectoral agreements and international emission standards.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UN FCCC) set up the Technology
Mechanism in 2010 to facilitate support to developing countries on climate technology development and
transfer. This includes financial mechanisms and capacity-building, and technical support to help countries
implement their ND Cs. The UNFCCC recently published guidance on stimulating the uptake of
technologies in support of NDC implementation and its new work programme until 2027 for accelerating

===== PDF_PAGE 116 =====
114 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

climate action through technology development and transfer (UNFCCC, 2021 [40]). However, it remains
grossly underfunded in view of its ambitious mandate (OECD, forthcoming[19]).
Skills and capabilities
Transitions call for wide-ranging changes – from lifestyles to the ways scientific research is carried out –
involving many different types of actors, including research organisations, industry, government,
entrepreneurs and civil society. Yet many individuals and organisation s lack what might be considered
transition-enabling skills 28 and capabilities (including dynamic capabilities that enable organisations to
adapt to changing conditions). For example:
1. Research-funding and research -performing bodies need to adapt their discip linary management
processes and training to promote TDR, which has implications for their organisational capabilities
and their employees’ skill sets. For example, peer -review and programme development and
management processes need to be adapted to take in to account the specificities of TDR. Some
research-performing organisations have already gone as far as articulating their missions and
reorganising their faculty and departmental structures around societal challenges, while others
have invested in inter -disciplinary and/or multi -stakeholder platforms. Yet others have adjusted
their teaching and training activities to promote TDR. Still, much more needs to be done to foster
TDR (OECD, 2020[17]).
2. In the public sector, the sorts of capabilities needed to promote sustainability transitions go beyond
the skills of civil servants (important as these are) to also encompass organisational capacities and
routines. These are not easy to develop quickly, nor can successful organ isational capacities and
routines be simply replicated, given their embeddedness in organisational histories and cultures.
There has also been a certain degree of “hollowing out” of state capacities in many OECD countries
over the last few decades, which m eans governments may need to rebuild the organisational
capabilities necessary to carry out transition tasks (OECD, 2021[2]). This is at a time when many
governments are looking to reduce their expenditures and reduce the size of their administrations.
3. In firms, a lack of skills and capabilities reduces their choices to invest in innovation. New
technologies require new skills and business models to enable their development and diffusion,
and the deployment of new infra structure. A successful green transition is likely to entail, for
example, upgrading skill sets in industries experiencing only minor adjustments; gearing up
educational institutions and firms to provide the new skills for new occupations and sectors that will
emerge from the green economy; and retraining and realigning skills in sectors that will decline as
a result (OECD, forthcoming[19]).
Addressing new skills and capabilities requirements in the STI system brings together a number of policy
areas, including the labour market, education and STI. On the one hand, it requires understanding the
supply side of skills and capabilities, including labour -market dynamics and the performane of education
systems. On the other hand, it requires an appreciation of changing demand as societal priorities
increasingly aim to boost sustainability and other key technological developments. Policies for future skill
and capability development in STI systems also need to t arget a broader range of societal, demographic
and economic groups to avoid perpetuating inequalities and promote a just transition. For example, the
engagement of younger generations in climate policy -making and action is increasingly seen as key to
meeting net-zero targets. Education systems need to equip youngsters with the skills and competences
that would help them adopt environmentally sustainable behaviours, including science skills (Borgonovi
et al., 2022[41]). In the workplace, new types of jobs are being created while many existing jobs are changing
with the adoption of cleaner technologies and greener work processes. At the same time, some sectors
will face jobs losses, as societies move away from polluting ac tivities. Work -based learning – and
vocational education and training more generally – can provide opportunities for adults to up - and reskill

===== PDF_PAGE 117 =====
 115
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

for a greener labour market. These opportunities should be explored from a systemic perspective that
incorporates innovation and industrial policy agendas (Cedefop, 2022[42]).
Outlook
Sustainability transitions will depend on science and technology for their success, but will also present
challenges for research and innovation activities – and, by extension, for the STI policies that support them.
This chapter has highlighted the need to compress the innovation cycle, which implies rapid changes in
multiple systems simultaneously. This calls for greater direction ality in STI systems, including in STI
policies, which can help articulate shared visions that mobilise a wide range of actors. However,
sociotechnical systems are complex and adaptive, and difficult to direct in a top-down manner. A systemic,
multilevel perspective can help design policy mixes that simultaneously create windows of opportunity,
build up innovative technologies and markets, and break down existing fossil -based sociotechnical
systems.
To operationalise these insights in concrete terms, the c hapter has outlined a simple framework that
considers transition reforms from the perspective of ten different but interlinked STI policy sub -domains.
Funding and finance are the first of these, where transformational levels of investment across the
innovation chain, including low-carbon technology diffusion and deployment, are needed to meet the scale
and pace of the net -zero transition. Moreover, the balance of funding support for public and private R&D
should shift to become more directive and solutions -oriented than today’s policy mix. A related policy mix
consideration concerns which technology areas to target. Technological innovation is an uncertain activity,
and technologies often interact with one another in unpredictable ways. Ideally, countries wo uld spread
their investments to develop domestic absorptive capacities for a range of technologies, but this is difficult
for countries with smaller STI systems, who would benefit from co -operation with other countries to pool
their efforts. Furthermore, technologies can create negative externalities, and potential trade -offs need to
be assessed continually (see Chapter 6).
More directed and solution -oriented R&D and innovation imply strengthening co-operation and
partnerships in STI systems, including bet ween scientific disciplines and between technology areas, as
well as between actors and activities at different stages of the innovation chain. This can help direct and
accelerate the pace of technological change, strengthening innovation chain linkages th rough the co -
design and co -production of science, technology and institutions, including markets. Wider society also
needs to be actively engaged in these processes. Public RIs and TIs can be useful focal points for
assembling constellations of innovation system actors, providing large-scale facilities for RD&D. However,
to perform this role effectively, they need to acquire new skills and capabilities, and receive more long -
term strategic funding.
While STI policy can enable sustainability transitions, ot her policy areas will likely take the lead – notably
those responsible for the largest greenhouse gas emissions, such as energy, transport and agricultural
policy. These have their own sizeable RD&D and deployment activities, together with supporting polic y
systems with which STI policy needs to interface. These policy areas also determine many of the
framework conditions that shape technological development paths, including competition policies that
encourage new innovative firms to challenge incumbents, s tandards that help create demand for low -
carbon innovations and carbon pricing that incentivise firms to adopt clean technologies. Governments
continue to experiment with new approaches to improve cross -governmental co -ordination, including
MOIPs (as described in Chapter 5), but this is a long-standing challenge with no quick and easy solutions.
The global scale and scope of climate change mean that international co -operation is essential to meet
net-zero targets. International STI co-operation can take many different forms, and its benefits can be wide-
ranging. However, it faces several barriers, not least that the vast majority of public R&D funding is allotted
within national boundaries, and international alignment between national calls and programmes in

===== PDF_PAGE 118 =====
116 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

notoriously difficult to achieve. Many low- and middle-income countries also need to enhance their scientific
and technological capabilities to absorb low-carbon innovations. The growing securitisation of STI policies
and rising geopolitical tensions could also impede future international co-operation (see Chapter 1).
The systemic scale and scope of the sustainability transition, and uncertainties over its future course, call
for a transformation of the knowledge and evidence base on which policy decisions will need to be made.
Future-oriented technology analysis, including strategic foresight and TA, can enhance governments’
anticipatory capacity and provide collective spaces where societal values and technological developments
can be considered together. Monitoring and evaluating the contribution of policy interventions will be
essential, not least to change course if necessary. There are, however, significant knowledge gaps on how
to monitor and evaluate sociotechnical transitions, a challenge that extend s to the lack of appropriate
statistical indicators. There is potential here for governments to make greater use of data -linking and
national statistical offices are carrying out experiments along these lines, but much more needs to be done
and at a faster pace.
Finally, the need for new skills and capabilities cuts across all STI policy sub -domains. Many gaps exist
within government itself, which is called upon to perform more active roles than in the recent past, working
closely with business, researchers and citizens, and across government to advance sustainability
transitions. Similar capabilities gaps exist in the business and research worlds. A further policy concern is
supporting people of working age and communities in attaining new skills and opport unities as part of a
just transition.
The policy goals and practices pursued in these STI policy sub -domains should reflect the kinds of
sustainability transitions wanted. Transitions should be just and have democratic legitimacy. They should
embody different forms of inclusivity in STI, for example, with respect to differences in geography, socio -
economic status, gender and ethnicity. While it is beyond the scope of this chapter to articulate a definitive
set of key values to which STI activities should adhere in support of sustainability transitions, the following
aspirations may provide some guidance:
 Sustainability: ensure STI policies support sustainability in multiple dimensions (i.e. economic,
social and environmental) by promoting equality, supporting ecosystem recovery and resilience,
and promoting system change, without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs
 Diversity: promote resilience by supporting a range of research and technology areas involving a
range of actors working on different challenges, beyond the realm of traditional STI actors
 Inclusivity: support broad participation in science and innovation and sharing of resources that
contribute to transparency, trust and collaboration, while targeting the development of solutions
that provide equal access and opportunities for society and promote social justice
 Agility: encourage the ability to move quickly and timely in tackling societal challenges like net -
zero, supporting the acceleration of change thro ugh experimentation and adaptation of research,
innovation and governance systems
 Ethics: nurture norms and principles that foster progress towards sustainability, promote justice
and fairness, and account for the trade -offs emerging among multiple system dimensions by
proposing actions that are consistent with the “greater good” and “what’s right”.
Ultimately, science and technological innovation should offer hope and mobilise human creativity and
ingenuity to tackle the most pressing contemporary challenges, including the race to net-zero. Aspirations
like these should underlie policy practice and serve as a compass to guide policy reforms enabling just
sustainability transitions.
Along these lines, the OECD has embarked on a new project, “S&T Policy 2025 : Enabling Transitions
through Science, Technology and Innovation”,29 to help governments further articulate the need for reform
and transitions, and reformulate their STI policy agendas accordingly. One of the project’s main goals is to

===== PDF_PAGE 119 =====
 117
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

develop an overarching guiding vision and policy framework that helps STI policy makers rethink, redesign
and implement a new portfolio of STI policies that drive sustainability transitions. The project uses the
simple policy sub -domain framework outlined in this chapter to formulate practical policy guidance on
specific key challenges.

References

Aghion, P. (2019), “Path dependence, innovation and the economics of climate change”, in
Handbook on Green Growth, Edward Elgar Publishing,
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788110686.00011.
[49]
Amoroso, S. et al. (2021), World Corporate Top R&D Investors: Paving the way for climate
neutrality, A joint JRC and OECD report, Publication Office of the European Union.,
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/910ccf7b-4c16-11ec-91ac-
01aa75ed71a1/language-en (accessed on 26 February 2023).
[29]
Aristodemou, L. et al. (2022), Commercialisation and Diffusion of Climate Change Mitigation and
Adaption (CCMA) Goods and Services: Identification and analysis of (eco-) green trademarks
using a natural language processing (NLP) approach and a climate change vocabulary
(CCV),
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/363573426_Commercialisation_and_Diffusion_of_C
limate_Change_Mitigation_and_Adaption_CCMA_Goods_and_Services_Identification_and_a
nalysis_of_eco-_green_trademarks_using_a_natural_language_processing_NLP_approach_
(accessed on 5 March 2023).
[20]
Attrey, A., M. Lesher and C. Lomax (2020), “The role of sandboxes in promoting flexibility and
innovation in the digital age”, OECD Going Digital Toolkit Notes, No. 2, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/cdf5ed45-en.
[7]
Aulie, F. et al. (2022), Will post-COVID-19 recovery packages accelerate low-carbon
innovation?, https://www.oecd.org/greengrowth/2022GGGSD-IssueNote2-Will-post-COVID-
19-recovery-packages-accelerate-low-carbon-innovation.pdf (accessed on
26 February 2023).
[18]
Borgonovi, F. et al. (2022), “Young people’s environmental sustainability
competence: Emotional, cognitive, behavioural, and attitudinal dimensions in EU and OECD
countries”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 274, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/1097a78c-en.
[41]
Cagnin, C., E. Amanatidou and M. Keenan (2012), “Orienting European innovation systems
towards grand challenges and the roles that FTA can play”, Science and Public Policy,
Vol. 39/2, pp. 140-152, https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scs014.
[36]
Cammeraat, E., A. Dechezleprêtre and G. Lalanne (2022), “Innovation and industrial policies for
green hydrogen”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 125, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/f0bb5d8c-en.
[23]
Cedefop (2022), Work-based learning and the green transition,
http://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2801/69991 (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[42]

===== PDF_PAGE 120 =====
118 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Dechezleprêtre, A. et al. (2022), “Fighting climate change: International attitudes toward climate
policies”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1714, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/3406f29a-en.
[34]
EEA (2019), Sustainability transitions: policy and practice, European Environment Agency ,
Copenhagen, https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/da060542-d8f7-11e9-
9c4e-01aa75ed71a1/language-en (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[46]
G7 (2022), G7 Statement on Climate Club,
https://www.g7germany.de/resource/blob/974430/2057926/2a7cd9f10213a481924492942dd
660a1/2022-06-28-g7-climate-club-data.pdf?download=1 (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[39]
Geels, F. (2020), “Transformative innovation and socio-technical transitions to address grand
challenges”, Alliance Manchester Business School University of Manchester,
https://euagenda.eu/upload/publications/transformative-innovation-and-socio-technical-
transitions-to-address-grand-challenges.pdf (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[47]
Geels, F. and J. Schot (2007), “Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways”, Research
Policy, Vol. 36/3, pp. 399-417, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2007.01.003.
[10]
Geels, F. et al. (2017), “Sociotechnical transitions for deep decarbonization”, Science,
Vol. 357/6357, pp. 1242-1244, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aao3760.
[9]
Haddad, C. et al. (2022), “Transformative innovation policy: A systematic review”, Environmental
Innovation and Societal Transitions, Vol. 43, pp. 14-40,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2022.03.002.
[38]
IEA (2023), “RD&D Budget”, IEA Energy Technology RD&D Statistics (database),
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00488-en (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[15]
IEA (2022), Net Zero by 2050: The need for net zero demonstration projects,
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/76426d5e-0c9c-4f9f-809f-
feca6bde702e/Theneedfornetzerodemonstrationprojects.pdf (accessed on
26 February 2023).
[4]
IEA (2021), Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/c8328405-en.
[43]
IEA, IRENA and UNFCCC (2022), The Breakthrough Agenda Report 2022: Accelerating Sector
Transitions Through Stronger International Collaboration,
https://www.iea.org/reports/breakthrough-agenda-report-2022 (accessed on
26 February 2023).
[11]
IPCC (2022), Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_FullReport.pdf
(accessed on 5 March 2023).
[33]
Janssen, M. (2019), “What bangs for your buck? Assessing the design and impact of Dutch
transformative policy”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 138, pp. 78-94,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.08.011.
[37]
Kern, F. (2012), “Using the multi-level perspective on socio-technical transitions to assess
innovation policy”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 79/2, pp. 298-310,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2011.07.004.
[5]

===== PDF_PAGE 121 =====
 119
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Kivimaa, P. and F. Kern (2016), “Creative destruction or mere niche support? Innovation policy
mixes for sustainability transitions”, Research Policy, Vol. 45/1, pp. 205-217,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2015.09.008.
[8]
Larrue, P. (2021), “The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A
new systemic policy approach to address societal challenges”, OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers, No. 100, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
[32]
Miedzinski, M. et al. (2020), International STI collaboration and investment for Sustainable
Development Goals. Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) for SDGs Roadmaps ,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/345978505_International_STI_collaboration_and_in
vestment_for_Sustainable_Development_Goals_Science_Technology_and_Innovation_STI_f
or_SDGs_Roadmaps (accessed on 26 February 2023).
[22]
OECD (2023), “Aggregate National Accounts, SNA 2008 (or SNA 1993): Gross domestic
product”, OECD National Accounts Statistics (database), https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00001-
en (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[16]
OECD (2022), Climate Tipping Points: Insights for Effective Policy Action, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/abc5a69e-en.
[48]
OECD (2022), Inclusive Forum on Carbon Mitigation Approaches, https://www.oecd.org/climate-
change/inclusive-forum-on-carbon-mitigation-approaches/ (accessed on 26 February 2023).
[21]
OECD (2022), “Measuring the environmental impacts of artificial intelligence compute and
applications: The AI footprint”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 341, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/7babf571-en.
[24]
OECD (2021), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021: Times of Crisis and
Opportunity, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/75f79015-en.
[2]
OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness
Innovation, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0464 (accessed
on 5 March 2023).
[31]
OECD (2021), “The inequalities-environment nexus: Towards a people-centred green transition”,
OECD Green Growth Papers, No. 2021/01, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/ca9d8479-en.
[35]
OECD (2020), “Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 88, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0ca0ca45-en.
[17]
OECD (2020), The Digitalisation of Science, Technology and Innovation: Key Developments and
Policies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/b9e4a2c0-en.
[26]
OECD (2019), Artificial Intelligence in Society, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/eedfee77-en.
[27]
OECD (2016), “The Internet of Things: Seizing the Benefits and Addressing the Challenges”,
OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 252, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5jlwvzz8td0n-en.
[28]

===== PDF_PAGE 122 =====
120 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

OECD (2015), “Book review”, Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions, Vol. 22, pp. 90-
91, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2016.05.001.
[1]
OECD (2015), SYSTEM INNOVATION: SYNTHESIS REPORT,
https://archiwum.pte.pl/pliki/2/1/OECD%20System.pdf (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[45]
OECD (forthcoming), Carbon Management for Net Zero: Bioeconomy and Beyond, OECD
Publishing, Paris.
[30]
OECD (forthcoming), Driving low-carbon innovations for climate neutrality. [19]
Palavicino, C., C. Matti and J. Witte (2022), Motion handbook. Developing a transformative
theory of change, https://transitionshub.climate-kic.org/publications/motion-handbook-
developing-a-transformative-theory-of-change/ (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[50]
Philp, J. and D. Winickoff (2018), “Realising the circular bioeconomy”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 60, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/31bb2345-en.
[25]
Schwaag Serger, S. and C. Palmberg (2022), “Towards transformative policy in Finland and
Sweden: some viewpoints from practice”, in Smart Policies for Societies in Transition, Edward
Elgar Publishing, https://doi.org/10.4337/9781788970815.00012.
[3]
Sharpe, S. and T. Lenton (2021), “Upward-scaling tipping cascades to meet climate goals:
plausible grounds for hope”, Climate Policy, Vol. 21/4, pp. 421-433,
https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2020.1870097.
[13]
Silvestrin, G., G. Diercks and C. Matti (2022), X-curve: A sense-making tool to foster collective
narratives on system change, https://drift.eur.nl/app/uploads/2022/02/X-Curve-booklet-
DRIFT-EIT-Climate-KIC-2022.pdf (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[44]
SYSTEMIQ (2023), “The Breakthrough Effect: how tipping points can accelerate net zero”,
https://www.systemiq.earth/breakthrough-effect/ (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[14]
Tàbara, J. (2021), Enabling positive tipping points towards global sustainability in uncertain
times, https://council.science/current/blog/enabling-positive-tipping-points-towards-global-
sustainability-in-uncertain-times/ (accessed on 26 February 2023).
[12]
UNFCCC (2021), Technology and nationally determined contributions: Stimulating the Uptake of
Technologies in Support of Nationally Determined Contribution Implementation ,
https://unfccc.int/ttclear/tec/techandndc.html (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[40]
Weber, K. and H. Rohracher (2012), “Legitimizing research, technology and innovation policies
for transformative change”, Research Policy, Vol. 41/6, pp. 1037-1047,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.10.015.
[6]

===== PDF_PAGE 123 =====
 121
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Notes
1 In the NZE, behavioural change refers to changes in ongoing or repeated behaviour on the part of
consumers which impact energy service demand or the energy intensity of an energy-related activity. Three
main types of behavioural change included in the NZE: (1) reducing excessive or wasteful energy use;
(2) transport mode switching; and (3) materials efficiency gains. Three‑quarters of the emissions reductions
from behavioural changes in the NZE are achieved through targeted government policies supported by
infrastructure development, e.g. a shift to rail travel supported by high‑speed railways. The remainder come
from adopting voluntary changes in energy saving habits, mainly in homes. Even in this case, public
awareness campaigns can help shape day‑to‑day choices about how consumers use energy (IEA, 2021[43]).
2 As stated in the previous sentence, directionality is implicit in all policy by design, and horizontal and
agnostic policy support favours incremental rather than radical innovation, development rather than R&D,
and mature rather than breakthrough technologies.
3 (Aghion, 2019[49]) identify five determinants of path dependence: knowledge spillovers (as innovations
build upon prior innovations in cumulative ways), network effects (when the attractiveness of a technology
depends upon networks of other users or suppliers), switching costs (the cost of switching to a different
technology, e.g. due to the need for different infrastructure and overcome incumbent interests), positive
feedbacks (when technologies benefi t from scale) and complementarities (when technologies have
complementary roles, such as renewables and storage) (OECD, forthcoming[19]).
4 These have been presented as “the X -curve” of sustainability t ransitions. See, for example, (Silvestrin,
Diercks and Matti, 2022[44]), (Palavicino, Matti and Witte, 2022[50])
5 For example, see (OECD, 2015[45]), (EEA, 2019[46]), (Geels, 2020[47]) and (IEA, IRENA and UNFCCC, 2022[11]).
6 The concept of “positive tipping points” has emerged from scholars working on climate system tipping
points. For a recent review of the latter, see (OECD, 2022[48]).
7 https://www.iea.org/reports/clean-energy-technology-innovation.
8 For example, a single 100 MW electrolyser for green hydrogen product ion costs EUR 50-75 million; in
the case of CCS, demonstration projects currently cost around USD 1 billion, take five years or more to
build and have a market value of around one-tenth of their cost (OECD, forthcoming[19]).
9 https://www.energy.gov/ia/clean-energy-technologies-demonstration-challenge.
10 For example, through its Horizon Europe, Innovation Fund an d InvestEU measures, the
European Commission will contribute over EUR 28 billion to the Clean Energy Technologies
Demonstration Challenge by 2027 to advance clean energy innovation and deployment, mainly in hard-to-
abate sectors.
11 Re-balancing green technology policies towards more RD&D support also has to be considered from an
industrial policy perspective. Some countries have specialised in the manufacturing of green goods, with
the emergence of the Chinese solar PV industry in the recent decade as a prime example of this trend.
However, while RD&D support policies by nature target domestic firms only, deployment subsidies benefit
domestic and foreign firms alike. Indeed, the Chinese solar PV industry was built on the back of renewable
energy subsidies in the United States, Europe and other regions (e.g. Australia). In line with recent
industrial policy objectives (see Chapter 2), governments could design deployment support policies against
a clear understanding of the domestic supply -side (firms, talents, infrastructure) so that they benefit both
consumers and the domestic economy (OECD, forthcoming[19]).

===== PDF_PAGE 124 =====
122 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

12 Business R&D is mostly “D” -oriented, i.e. it focuses on development, and less oriented to “R”, i. e.
research. This is even more so when incentivised by R&D tax incentives.
13 Philanthropy – for example, the Bezos Earth Fund and Bill Gates’ Breakthrough Energy initiative – is
playing a growing role in promoting and funding technological innovation for n et-zero. Breakthrough
Energy, for example, has several initiatives – including Breakthrough Energy Ventures, Breakthrough
Energy Catalysts, and Breakthrough Energy Fellows – that support research and innovation activities
across the innovation chain.
14 At the same time, recent changes in corporate governance and the emergence of environmental, social
and governance (ESG) criteria, as well financial or fiscal signals such as carbon pricing and taxation, have
helped stimulate interest among private investors in financing longer-term investments. Blended finance in
this context represents only one part of a broader financing framework for sustainability.
15 The IEA maintains the ETP Clean Energy Technology Guide, an interactive framework that contains
information on over 500 individual technology designs and components across the whole energy system
that contribute to achieving the goal of net -zero emissions. For each technology, the guide includes
information on the level of maturity and a compilation of develo pment and deployment plans, as well as
cost and performance improvement targets and leading players in the field. See https://www.iea.org/data-
and-statistics/data-tools/etp-clean-energy-technology-guide.
16 When framing their choices, governments use various labels (and underlying concepts) to describe
technologies, such as “key”, “emerging”, “enabling”, “converging”, “general purpose ” and “niche”. They
also refer to technology-readiness levels to indicate a technology’s maturity, invoking the innovation cycle
model. These descriptors have consequences for the types of policy interventions governments pursue.
17 TIs in the public sector are often located in a type of public research institute known as “research and
technology organisations”.
18 The impacts of environmental degradation are concentrated among vulnerable groups and households.
Yet the benefits and costs of mitigating environmental policies are like ly to be unevenly distributed across
households. For example, while carbon pricing is a central component of green policies, affordability
concerns need to be taken into account as higher energy costs may put greater burden on low -income
households and com promise their well -being. Moreover, higher taxes on road transport fuels may affect
rural residents more than urban dwellers, since the former tend to rely more on private cars and have
limited access to viable public transport alternatives. Green policies can also have important distributional
implications for jobs at the sectoral or regional levels. For example, employment levels in carbon-intensive
heavy industries and fossil fuels extractive activities are expected to fall, which can have gender and
regional implications (OECD, 2021[35]).
19 An integrated, systemic policy approach is needed to ensure reforms are both green and people-centred.
These should include (i) mitigation of the possible regressive impact of pricing environmental externalities
for vulnerable households, e.g. through well-designed revenue recycling schemes; (ii) investment in human
capital, e.g. through active labour market policies, well-targeted income support measures, and upgrading
skills t o facilitate labour reallocation; and (iii) sectoral and place -based policies that address systemic
inequalities, e.g. through policies that facilitate social dialogue, social capital investments, social protection,
and skills and education investments to ease structural adjustment of local economies (OECD, 2021[35]).
20 The Global Commission on People -Centred Clean Energy Transitions made 12 recommendations in
four broad areas. I. Decent jobs and worker protection : 1. design transitions to maximise the creation of
decent jobs; 2. develop tailored government support for communities and workers as well as a focus on

===== PDF_PAGE 125 =====
 123
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

skills and training; and 3. use social dialogue, robust stakeholder engagement and policy co -ordination to
deliver better outcomes. II. Social and economic development: 4. ensure that policies enhance social and
economic development, and improve quality of life for all; 5. prioritise universal clean energy access and
the elimination of energy poverty; and 6. maintain and enhance energy security, affordability and resilience.
III. Equity, social inclusion and fairness: 7. incorporate gender, equality and social inclusion considerations
in all policies; 8. ensure fair distribution of clean energy benefits and avoid the risk of disproportionate
negative impacts on vulnerable populations; and 9. integrate the voices of younger generations in decision
making. IV. People as active participants: 10. involve the public through participation and communication;
11. use insights from behavioural science to design effective behaviour change policies; and 12. enhance
impact through international collaboration and exchange of best practice.
21 Citing (Geels et al., 2017[9]) “Policy-oriented research on deep decarbonization requires complementing
model-based analysis with sociotechnical research. Whereas the former analyzes technically feasible
least-cost pathways, the latter addresses innovation processes, business strategies, social acceptance,
cultural discourses, and political struggles, which are difficult to model but crucial in real -world transitions.
Although full integration of both approaches is not possible, bridging strategies may enable iterative
interactions in whi ch models provide techno -economic checks of qualitative narratives, while
sociotechnical approaches provide wider feasibility checks on model outcomes. Such analyses may
underpin the development and implementation of policy strategies that are both cost -effective and socio-
politically feasible.”
22 For further information, see https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/strategic-planning/strategic-foresight_en.
23 The text on statistical indicators in this section is based on discussions during an S&T Policy 2025 policy
dialogue, “Policies for data and evidence on STI in a world in transition”, organised by the OECD
Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy (CSTP) and the OECD Working Party of National
Experts on Science and Technology Indicators (NESTI) on 15 September 2022.
https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/stpolicy2025.
24 The OECD NESTI leads the OECD’s statistical work on STI, contributing to the development of indicators
and quantitative analyses needed to meet the requirements and priorities of the CSTP. In 2021, NESTI
established the OECD Expert Group on the Management and Analysis of R&D and Innov ation
Administrative Data (MARIAD) to facilitate and support its work on international collaboration in the
statistical processing and analysis of administrative data relevant to the study of STI systems and
government policies. The central focus for MARIA D’s objectives and scope of activity is the domain of
administrative microdata for public support and funding of R&D and innovation. One of its key aims is to
facilitate the exchange of best practices in the management of administrative data on R&D and innovation,
a field of considerable complexity and under constant evolution.
25 Mission Innovation has 22 member countries, plus the European Commission: Australia, Austria, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Norway, Korea, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.
26 See the “Mission Innovation” website for further information: http://mission-innovation.net/.
27 As of 1 September 2022 , the Breakthrough Agenda signatories are: Australia, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, China, Denmark, Egypt, the European Union, France, Germany, Guinea
Bissau, Holy See, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portu gal, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Korea, Spain, Sweden, Türkiye, the United Arab
Emirates, the United States and the United Kingdom.

===== PDF_PAGE 126 =====
124 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

28 There are many definitions of “skills for the green transition”, and most share that they refer to a broad
set of technical and transversal skills that will be driven by, or contribute to, the green transition. A working
group of the Inter-Agency Group on Technical and Vocational Education and Training, which includes the
OECD, recently arrived at the following definition: ‘“Skills for the green transition” include skills and
competences but also knowledge, abilities, values and attitudes needed to live, wo rk and act in resource-
efficient and sustainable economies and societies. They are: (1) technical: required to adapt or implement
standards, processes, services, products and technologies to protect ecosystems and biodiversity, and to
reduce energy, materi als and water consumption. Technical skills can be occupation -specific or cross -
sectoral; and (2) transversal: linked to sustainable thinking and acting, relevant to work (in all economic
sectors and occupations) and life. Alternatively referred to as “sustainability competences”, “life skills”, “soft
skills” or “core skills”.’ (Cedefop, 2022[42]).
29 See the S&T Policy 2025 website: https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/stpolicy2025/.

===== PDF_PAGE 127 =====
 125
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Science played an essential role in generating the knowledge and
technologies needed to respond to the COVID-19 crisis. The pandemic
offers lessons that can position science to respond more effectively to
future crises. For instance, much can be learned from successful co-
operation between various actors during the pandemic, but reinforcing
these relationships over the longer term may require significant change to
academic culture, structures, incentives and rewards. Many of the required
changes – including in research performance assessment, public
engagement, and transdisciplinary research – are already underway but
have not yet been adopted at the necessary scale and speed because of
embedded inertia in science systems. More radical change is necessary to
spur science to engage with other societal stakeholders to produce the
broader range of outputs and solutions that are urgently required to deal
with complex global challenges and crises.

4 Mobilising science in times of crisis:
Lessons learned from COVID-19

===== PDF_PAGE 128 =====
126 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Key messages
 The COVID-19 pandemic has been a complex and cascading global crisis, with science playing
an essential role in generating the knowledge and technologies to enable effective policy
responses. Ensuring the necessary scientific capacity is a critical consideration for
governments in preparing for and responding to other ongoing and future crises, including the
climate emergency.
 The scientific response to a complex crisis depends on the mobilisation of existing knowledge
and resources across a broad range of disciplines. This requires long -term commitment and
sustainable support for research infrastructures (RIs) and basic research across the breadth of
science.
 The pandemic has illustrated both the potential and challenges in using big data and digital
tools for crisis management. It has positively accelerated access to research data and scientific
information and at the same time revealed the limits of current open science approaches. It is
important that this progress continues after the pandemic, and that inclusion (in terms of both
data coverage and access) becomes embedded in open science policies.
 The traditional distinction between policy for science and science for policy weakens during a
crisis, when science becomes easily politicised. Nevertheless, maintaining t he independence
and autonomy of scientific research and advice is critical to ensure public trust.
 It is a primary responsibility of the scientific community to ensure the rigour and completeness
of the scientific research and communications that inform p olicy and decision -making during
crises. This requires integrating insights and knowledge across many different disciplines, and
open discussion of knowledge gaps and uncertainties.
 Ultimately, the effectiveness of the scientific response to a crisis depen ds on the relationships
between science and other sectors of society, including politicians and policy makers, business
and industry and, most importantly, the public. Establishing resilient and trusted relationships
across these sectors is essential.
 Although public trust in scientific institutions has increased overall during the pandemic, it is
fragile and needs to be nurtured. Scientists must play an active role in responsibly
communicating scientific evidence to the public and engaging citizens in tran sdisciplinary
initiatives. Training, support and new incentives will be required to achieve this.
 A global pandemic requires a global response. International scientific co-ordination and co-
operation structures and mechanisms were severely tested by the pandemic, and showed
their limitations. Many countries and populations could not access the benefits of science
for a variety of reasons. Ensuring equity and inclusion is not the sole responsibility of
science but it is in the mutual interest of all countr ies to enable a global and inclusive
scientific response to crises.

===== PDF_PAGE 129 =====
 127
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Introduction
Science underpinned the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic from the outset. It was expected to provide
both the tools (e.g. diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics) and kn owledge (e.g. understanding of viral
infectivity, epidemiological monitoring and behavioural insights) that policy makers could use to effectively
respond to and manage the crisis. The scientific response had to be rapid and encompass many different
scientific domains and sources of evidence. The response also had to be rigorous, yet the evidence base
for various interventions was severely limited and even basic questions (such as how the virus was spread)
could not be fully answered during the first few mo nths of the pandemic. The pandemic did not wait for
science, and what had originally been framed as a largely biomedical/public health crisis soon expanded
across all sectors of economies. It was quickly apparent that openness and accountability would be
important to establish and maintain the necessary public trust in science and associated policies.
Science was in the spotlight more than ever before and endowed with huge expectations, and yet the
pandemic dramatically disrupted normal scientific practice itself. As in other economic sectors, many
scientists had to adapt rapidly to a new virtual and working environment for extended periods. International
travel and meetings, which are critical mechanisms for scientific exchange, were largely replaced by video
calls and virtual conferences (Buchanan et al., 2021[1]). Physical access to experimental resources and
facilities was replaced by remote access. Doctoral and early-career researchers were particularly affected:
as laboratory investigations and fieldwork were disrupted, they were forced to adopt digital tools to maintain
essential contact with colleagues, mentors and peers. As in other areas of the economy, women scientists
were harshly affe cted, as they often had to balance the double burden of care duties and professional
responsibilities while working from home (OECD, 2021[2]) (OECD, 2021[3]).
Given the rapidly changing, high -pressure context, this chapter analyses how science performed in
response to the pandemic. It draws out lessons that can position science to respond more effectively to
crises – including those that are already with us (such as climate change or biodiversity loss), those that
we can reasonably foresee (such as the next infectious disease pandemic) and those that we cannot
predict, but which will surely arrive. Previous OECD work (OECD, 2018[4]) has investigated the different
roles of science in terms of the so -called “crisis management cycle”, i.e. preparedness, response, and
recovery / feedback. Science is embedded across the whole of this cycle, and in each phase, it interacts
with other stakeholders outside the public science system, including policy makers, the private sector, and
civil society. Such interplay is critical to mounting effective responses to crises. It is important in relation to
COVID-19 and crisis response more broadly to consider not only how the science ecosystem responded
but also – and perhaps more saliently – to evaluate the efficacy of the interactions and relationships with
other sectors and actors.
Rather than simply producing excellent research, science has had to engage rapidly with other sectors on
a major scale to develop “fit -for-purpose” technological tools and evidence to enable effective policy
responses to the crisis. Science policymakers have implemented a number of different initiatives in order
to achieve this. At the same time, they have had to pay careful attention to ensure the continued functioning
of the broader science system and balance urgent versus long -term needs and expectations. While the
resources for science have increased in some countries – specifically to support the pandemic response
– this increase has not reflected the scale of additional demands. Hence, the scientific response has been
highly dependent on what already existed, and actions by science policy makers have been largely
concentrated on re -focusing, adapting, accelerating, enabling and scaling -up existing activities and
processes.
The OECD has compiled a detailed description of science, technology and innovation (STI) policy
initiatives taken by different countries during the f irst six months of the pandemic. An updated catalogue
can be found on the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) Compass COVID-19 Watch portal1
(see also Chapter 1). This chapter analyses the challenges faced by countries in implementing these policy

===== PDF_PAGE 130 =====
128 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

initiatives. It delves into what policies worked well (or less well) – and why – and discusses the policy
implications for the future. This analysis focuses on two main areas:
1. Policy for science , i.e. the policies adopted to facilitate the necessary research for addressing
the pandemic. The chapter focuses on three broad topics that have been particularly important in
the science response to the pandemic, namely: (i) access to data and scientific information;
(ii) mobilisation of RIs; and (iii) development of transdisciplinary research and multinational
partnerships.
2. Science for policy , i.e. the policies adopted to ensure that research agendas reflected policy
needs, and that research evidence effectively informed policy and decision -making (including by
citizens). The chapter focuses on three critical areas for attention, namely: (i) ensuring that
research addresses policy needs; (ii) the operation of science advisory systems; and (iii) public
communication and engagement.
Figure 4.1. Policy for science and science for policy

Note: Science policy influences the development of science through support for science system assets – RIs, data, and science -industry
collaborations – and science has a role in facilitating broader policy development through enabling activities – research agenda setting, public
communication and engagement, and provision of science advice during crises. However, there are interplays between these areas, with science
assets contributing to the ability of science to inform policy development and enabling activit ies influencing science policy choices and the
direction of science.
These two main areas map onto what might normally be considered as core business for science –
i.e. research and knowledge generation – and what may be referred to as “third -mission” activities, which
generally receive less attention and are less valued within academia. Although this division is
commonplace, COVID-19 – where science has been put squarely at centre stage – has clearly illustrated
the continuous interaction between science for policy and policy for science, and the importance of
considering them together and allocating them equal attention during crises (see Figure 4.1). This has
required a major shift in thinking from science policy makers and research providers. For example,
individual scientific excellence as measured by publication outputs needed to be balanced against urgent
policy needs, rapid sharing of data and in formation, and public communication and engagement. As
science ministries, agencies and institutions now begin to evaluate their response to the crisis, it will be
important to adopt criteria and indicators that reflect the full range of demands on science .

===== PDF_PAGE 131 =====
 129
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Over the past two years, the OECD has organised a series of international workshops on “lessons learned
from COVID-19”, exploring each of the six topics listed above. 2 Building on earlier OECD work in each of
these areas, the workshops included case pres entations and panel discussions. Their aim was to identify
actions that science policy makers could take to better mobilise science in response to crises. As the
COVID-19 pandemic was the primary focus of these discussions, some of the issues identified we re
specific to pandemics. Strikingly, however, many of these issues could readily be extrapolated to overall
crisis preparedness. This chapter focuses on these more generic areas for policy action.
Policy for science
Open science and data
Prior to the pandemic, science policy makers in many countries had already begun to implement policies
to promote the three main pillars of open science, i.e. open access to scientific publications, increased
access to research data and public engagement (OECD, 2015[5]) (Dai, Shin and Smith, 2018 [6]). At the
very onset of the pandemic, it became clear that access to scientific information and data would be critical
for all countries, and this was an early target for science policy initiatives. In January 2020, the open sharing
of the original SARS-Cov-2 virus sequence by an international consortium led by Yong-Zhen Zhang of the
Shanghai School of Public Health was the starting point for scientists a cross the world to begin work on
diagnostic tests, vaccines and therapeutics (Wu et al., 2020[7]). Meta-analyses of literature from previous
infectious disease pandemics, combined with the development and sharing of epidemiological models and
scenarios, enabled evidence-based policy making. Effective public engagement was important not only to
collect data and information, but also to inform researchers and policy makers about the real-life effects of
the pandemic. As the pandemic progressed, it also became clear that access and sharing within the
scientific community was not sufficient and that the public wanted access to the scientific data and
information that were informing policies. Indeed, the pan demic significantly shifted the emphasis on
openness and transparency, while at the same time raising new ethical considerations around the
collection and use of personal data and information.
Several national and international organisations took initiatives early on to promote open access to COVID-
19 related scientific publications and this has had a major impact on the accessibility of most of this
information. Figure 4.2 shows that the proportion of open access publications on COVID-19 is significantly
higher than for other medical conditions, e.g. dementia and diabetes. There has also been a significant
increase in scientific publications related to COVID -19 between 2020 and 2022. In a landmark initiative
facilitated by the National Institutes of Health in the United States, a group of major science journal
publishers made relevant articles available in formats and under licence terms that facilitated text mining
and secondary analysis.3 Similar open-access collections of published scientific literature were developed
in other countries and scientific domains. One example is the COVID -19 LOVE (Living Overview of
Evidence) initiative, launched in Chile as an open repository and classification platform that uses
systematic methods and automation technologie s to connect users to a comprehensive collection of
published COVID-19 evidence for decision -making (Verdugo-Paiva et al., 2022[8]) (see also Figure 4.5).
Some of these initiatives integrated pre-prints in their collections. Indeed, the growth in openly accessible
pre-prints was one of the characteristics of scientific information dissemination during the pandemic (Fraser
et al., 2021[9]). This was a response to the demand for rapid and timely access to new scientific research
information and in that regard, it can be considered a success. Scientific research published in pre -prints
helped inform policies. However, in the absence of prior peer review , the rigour of the research was not
always assured, and the media and public made little distinction between preliminary research results
published in pre-prints and peer-reviewed articles in scientific journals.

===== PDF_PAGE 132 =====
130 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 4.2. Open access of COVID-19, diabetes and dementia publications, 2020 and 2022
Total and free full text Pubmed publications

Note: Publications include the following types of peer -reviewed articles: Books and Documents, Clinical Trials, Meta-Analysis, Randomized
Controlled Trials, Reviews and Systematic Reviews4.
Source: OECD calculations based on US National Institutes of Health PubMed data, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov (accessed 2 December
2022).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/lta0je
Ensuring scientific integrity was sometimes a challenge, jeopardising public trust
A number of unsubstantiated, poorly designed or fraudulent scientific results were communicated via pre-
prints, undermining science and in some cases promoting conspiracy theories and populist political
positions. At the same time, it was not only pre-prints that were used as vehicles for dissemination of false
and fraudulent results – one of the most notorious cases was a publication in the prestigious medical
journal The Lancet, for which the purported international patient data set did not exist (Baker, Van Noorden
and Maxmen, 2020 [10]). This publication added to the confusion and controversy around the use of
hydroxychloroquine as a therapy for COVID -19. Ensuring scientific integrity, and the quality and rigour of
scientific publications and other information outputs in a crisis w hen there is increased emphasis on
timeliness and openness, is a critical challenge for the scientific community. Mandating that the data
underpinning a pre -print or publication are made openly available – or, in cases where these data are
sensitive, ensur ing that they are peer -reviewed – are important safeguards that should be widely
implemented. If this issue is not adequately addressed, then public trust in science can rapidly dissipate.
Scientific domains varied in making their research data open
Many different types of scientific or research data are relevant to the COVID -19 pandemic, and should
ideally be findable, accessible, interoperable and re -useable (FAIR) (Research Data Alliance, 2020 [11]).
While the specific details may differ, the requirement for FAIR data across many scientific domains is
characteristic of any complex or cascading crisis. When such a crisis is international, operating across
different jurisdictions or borders further complicates efforts to make data FAIR. This is even more the case
when much of the data of interest are personal or otherwise sensitive, as was the case for COVID-19. The
pandemic was a stress-test for all research domains to assess where they are up to in makin g their data
FAIR. In this regard, the infrastructures, processes, standards, and trusted relationships for managing and
A.2020 B.2022
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
 0
20 000
40 000
60 000
80 000
100 000
120 000
140 000
COVID Diabetes Dementia
All publications
Free full text
Share of open access (right-hand scale) %
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
 0
20 000
40 000
60 000
80 000
100 000
120 000
140 000
COVID Diabetes Dementia
All publications
Free full text
Share of open access (right-hand scale) %

===== PDF_PAGE 133 =====
 131
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

sharing data that had been established prior to the pandemic, proved to be critical. Those fields, such as
genetics, which had made sig nificant investments in FAIR data prior to the pandemic were able to build
rapidly on this. Other fields, such as clinical research or social sciences, with a narrower data -sharing
culture were generally ill-prepared for the demands of a complex crisis like COVID-19.
The revised OECD Recommendation concerning Access to Research Data from Public Funding was
adopted in January 2021 and identifies the generic areas to be addressed in making research data FAIR
(OECD, 2021[12]). At a more operational level, the RDA-COVID-19 WG Recommendations and Guidelines
for Data Sharing, which were developed bottom-up by the inter
national research community, were published six months into the pandemic and provided detai led advice
for specific research domains (Research Data Alliance, 2020 [11]). Different actions (see Figure 4.3) are
required at different stages of the research data life cycle to make data FAIR, and many of these can be
supported and incentivised by judicious policy interventions. Different areas of research will require varying
levels of support and incentives to implement these actions and make their data FAIR.
Figure 4.3. The Covid-19 research data life cycle and policy levers

Note: Policy actions are necessary across the different steps of the research data life cycle to ensure enhanced access to COVID -19 research
data.
Source: developed by the OECD and the Research Data Alliance.
Trusted data repositories are needed to deal with privacy concerns
While the research community has the primary responsibility for providing access to the data (and the
associated software) it collects or generates, much of the data used for research during the pandemic

===== PDF_PAGE 134 =====
132 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

came from other sources and were n ot primarily designed for research. This is particularly the case in
social sciences, which use data from multiple sources – including administrative data from the public sector
and social media data, which are controlled by the private sector (OECD, 2016[13]). Much of these data are
personal and, even when anonymised, are subject to specific regulatory and ethical considerations. Clinical
and health services data, which are important for epidemiological modelling and m any other areas of
pandemic research, are subject to similar considerations, and need to be managed and shared accordingly
(OECD, 2020[14]).
Much of the value of population data depends on their being disaggregated, e.g. by gender, social status
or ethnicity. Such granular information can be critical for crisis management and – as with COVID -19 –
targeting policy interventions and communication strategies (OECD, 2020[15]), (OECD, 2021[16]). However,
this is precluded in many jurisdictions because of privacy concerns. It is important to support trusted data
repositories, located in academic centres or other public-sector organisations such as national statistical
agencies or medical institutions, in ensuring FAIR, ethically correct, legally compliant and timely access to
sensitive or personal data, and to enable their “safe” usage by accredited academic resea rchers. The
science community needs to be involved, together with other relevant stakeholders, in defining the policies
and processes governing access to different types of administrative data. Dialogues and agreements
should also be established with comme rcial-sector data holders and citizens to determine which data
should be made available to scientists (and under what conditions), both routinely and in times of crisis
(OECD, 2016[13]).
Recommendations:
1. Accelerate efforts towards open access to publications, provision of FAIR data and safe sharing
of sensitive data, building on the momentum provided by the pandemic and supporting and
consolidating ongoing initiatives in each of these areas.
2. Prioritise the collection of quantitative and qualitative data and robust evidence for use in designing
public health and social measures (PHSMs). In particular, “baseline data” on the effectiveness of
commonly deployed measures are required, which will often require international co llaboration.
3. Ensure inclusion across countries and population groups in data collection. Many of the groups
that are most vulnerable during crises are absent or under -represented in the administrative and
research datasets that are commonly used to inform policy. Online collection represents a
particular challenge for those who are not “digitally connected”.
4. Support and incentivise efforts to share and integrate administrative, research and commercial
data that are relevant to crisis management. Some of th ese data will be sensitive, and provisions
and protocols should be put in place to enable safe and timely access in emergency situations.
5. Accelerate the adoption of new technology and processes to deal with real -time collection of big
data for policy and d ecision-making. A combination of human expertise, workflows and
technologies (apps, algorithms, high -performance computers, etc) is required to extract the
maximum benefit from the massive – and increasing – amounts of data that are available to inform
both crisis management and routine policy development.
Research infrastructures
RIs provide shared experimental facilities and resources for the scientific community. There exist many
different types of RI which operate at different scales, from local/region al to global, and play a critical role
in facilitating research in most scientific domains. The primary mission of all RIs is to enable excellent
science, requiring long -term strategic investment. In this regard, they overlap with some public research
institutes, as well as research and technology organisations that also provide research services – although
typically focusing more on the needs of specific economic sectors and supporting applied research and

===== PDF_PAGE 135 =====
 133
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

innovation. The distinction between these groups, which differs across countries, is not critical to this
chapter, which uses the term “research infrastructure” generically. RIs provide the scaffolding for scientific
research. Because of their service function, unique expertise and established links with multiple users –
and often multiple countries – they are a critical scientific resource in responding to crises.
Bio/health RIs played a central service provision and co-ordination role
RIs from the biomedical, clinical and life sciences (bio/health) were at the centre of the science response
from the very outset of the pandemic. In many countries, dedicated public health institutes played a central
co-ordination role, working closely with academic researchers to develop the necessary data, information
and tools to inform policy decisions. For instance, the Norwegian National Institute for Public Health, the
Robert Koch Institute in Germany, and to a lesser extent the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in the United States performed this function at the axis between policy, science and the public, placing
them in a sometimes exposed and vulnerable position (see section on science advice). Other bio/health
RIs played a critical role in the early development and testing of diagnostics and therapies, working closely
with scientists from academia and industry. Many also played an essential role in providing the FAIR data
and analytical services that have underpinned efforts by the research community to understand the
pandemic and support policy makers.
Networking and co-operation among bio/health RIs proved particularly valuable. As the scientific questions
raised during the crisis were often complex, researchers often required services and data from multiple
RIs. Close liaison between RIs enabled the deve lopment of common cross -infrastructural workflows that
could be readily integrated in regular operations (e.g. linking chemical screening, structural biology and
data analytics). Trusted relations and collaborations established before the crisis were impor tant as they
enabled partners to align different administrative requirements rapidly and streamline their normal
processes. Existing links sometimes consolidated into more concrete alliances that further facilitated
access to connected data and services. N otable examples include the Alliance of Medical Research
Infrastructures,5 the Analytical Research Infrastructures of Europe, 6 and the Collaborating Network of
Networks for Evaluating COVID -19 and Therapeutic Strategies in the United States.7 Capacity-building
and training was a particularly important charge for many RIs. In some instances, RIs or alliances of RIs
provided direct support to public health systems, boosting existing diagnostic capacity to manage samples,
developing high -throughput screening, and training health service staff on diagnostic testing and
biosafety.8
Many clinical RIs, including dedicated clinical trial centres, played an important role in developing and
testing new diagnostics and therapies.9 However, clinical trials were one area in which the response from
the scientific community was “mixed” (see Chapter 1). There was a particular challenge in ensuring
adequate patient sample sizes to produce reliable and reproducible results. 10 This was compounded by a
lack of trial registration s and, in many instances, limited access to the trial data even after results were
published (Besançon et al., 2021[17]). Overall, a large number of underpowered clinical studies and trials
were performed in many countries (OECD, 2020[18]). Many of these could not be reproduced and generated
little useful information. At the same time there are a number of exemplary initiatives, where clinical RIs
and other academic and private-sector actors worked together internationally, adopting common protocols
and processes to recruit large patient numbers and generate rigorous results in record time. 11 In areas
where such networks did not exist, most notably with regard to testing the efficacy of PHSMs, the evidence
base for policy has been severely lacking. It is important that the clinical and public health research
community learn from the experience during COVID -19 and establish the necessary infrastructures,
networks and protocols to support rigorous evaluation studies.
RIs from other research domains also played important roles
The mobilisation of RIs during the crisis was not restricted to bio/health RIs. At the beginning of 2020,
physics RIs, which provide access to speci alist equipment and services, developed fast -tracked access

===== PDF_PAGE 136 =====
134 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

for COVID-19-related projects. This was largely the case for synchrotron facilities, which can be used to
explore the structure and interactions of molecules, including viral proteins and potentia l drugs. High -
performance computing (HPC) was another area of major mobilisation. HPC has played a critical role in
data analysis and modelling for multiple aspects of COVID -19 research, from exploring viral replication
mechanisms to drug design, and from understanding transmission to developing large -scale
epidemiological models (Nature Computational Science, 2021 [19]). Large RIs (such as CERN) with HPC
systems and know -how made their resources availabl e for COVID -19 research, and federated HPC
networks were established to provide easy access to both public and private facilities. 12 As the pandemic
progressed, RIs in the social sciences and humanities were also mobilised in a number of countries to
conduct social surveys, analysing attitudes towards and the potential impacts of the PHSMs that were
being implemented in response to the pandemic.13
With the exception of Europe, there was a lack of international co-ordination
Although RIs are often used by international communities of researchers, the COVID-19 crisis highlighted
a lack of international co -ordination. Despite increased networking between RIs, those links were mostly
restricted to the national or regional level (Europe was an exception in this re gard, with RI strategies and
co-operation mechanisms having been developed at the European level for some years). The lack of
international co-ordination hindered the sharing of data (particularly in clinical and social domains where
countries have different ethical and regulatory standards) and the full mobilisation of other complementary
assets. Furthermore, the uneven distribution of RI capacities at the global level prevented access to
resources and data in many parts of the world, contributing to the disconnect between needs and solutions.
Thus, effective global action on crises will require science stakeholders to address a lack of engagement
with, and funding for, low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). This applies not only to future pandemics,
but also to ongoing and future crises related to environmental change and natural disasters.
The notable exception with regard to cross -border co -ordination was Europe, where the European
Commission (EC) framework programmes have promoted European research co -operation for many
years. This investment paid off in mobilising science across national borders (Veron and Di Ciommo,
2020[20]). European RIs, such as ELIXIR and BBMRI -ERIC, provided access to data, materials, facilities
and services across countries. In addition, many European research projects were re -oriented to address
COVID-19, and new projects were rapidly initiated using well -tested cross-national funding mechanisms.
The pandemic gave extra imp etus to the European Open Science Cloud, moving it from an attractive but
ambitious concept for the science community to an essential requirement for the evidence -based
management of complex long -term crises. Many EC -funded activities provided an anchor po int for
scientists from outside the European Union to co-operate with multiple European countries. In some cases
(e.g. for genomic data), European co -operative activities have provided a basis for intercontinental
collaboration.14
Recommendations
1. Consider RIs as strategic assets with a major role to play in crisis preparedness and response.
This means integrating RIs into crisis preparedness and response strategies, and ensuring that
this role is included in the missions of individual RIs (and incentivised accordingly).
2. Recognise RIs as unique resources for training and capacity-building and support them in building
and maintaining the capacities required to respond to ongoing and future crises. This entails
ensuring sustainable career paths for the profess ional staff required to keep an RI operating
effectively and supporting their role in upskilling other personnel in preparation for emergencies.
3. Provide long-term strategic investment to RIs, focusing on resilience as well as efficiency. While
maximising efficiency and operating to maximum capacity may be understandable targets during

===== PDF_PAGE 137 =====
 135
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

times of calm, having some spare capacity and immediate access to deployable resources is
critical to ensure a timely response to crises.
4. Facilitate networking across RI eco systems and partnership -building between different
stakeholders. RIs demonstrated during the pandemic that they can play a critical intermediary or
brokering role across disciplines and sectors. This function should be emphasised and supported
during their normal operations.
5. Recognise the unique role that RIs play in international co -operation, including through the
provision of data and analysis, and make the necessary long -term investment in building trusted
cross-border relationships.
Partnerships: Transdisciplinary and multi-lateral collaboration
Given the scale and complexity of the pandemic and the urgent need for information and tools to effectively
respond, it has been critical that scientists from different disciplines, sectors and countries are ab le to
combine their resources and expertise. In practice, this has translated into a variety of co-creation (Kreiling
and Paunov, 2021[21]) and transdisciplinary (OECD, 2020[22]) initiatives, some of which are focused around
RIs (see previous section) or collaborative platforms, and all of which are characterised by the involvement
of multiple different actors.
Vaccine development drew heavily on public-private partnerships
Promoting knowledge transfer and public -private partnerships (PPPs) between academic research and
industry has long been a focus of STI policy. The main challenges to this objective are well-known: different
aims and incentives, different approac hes to openness and different approaches to intellectual property
rights. In fields such as biotechnology and biomedicine, these challenges have been a focus of policy
attention for several decades and – providing commercial interest and a potentially viab le market can be
identified – PPPs are relatively easy to establish and often flourish. Many such “classical” PPPs played a
role in the response to COVID -19, most notably vaccine development. In addition, more recent
experimentation with novel open science -industry-academia partnerships, in which multiple companies
and academic institutions share expertise in pre -competitive research, provided a basis for the
establishment of similar arrangements in response to COVID-19 (Gold, 2021[23]).
The early days of the pandemic were characterised by a considerable lack of clarity on the potential
commercial returns from diagnostics, vaccine and antiviral therapeutics, and there was strong demand
from many LMICs an d international organisations to ensure equitable access at reasonable prices.
Ensuring affordable access was an important motivation for some academic institutions, as witness the
role of Oxford University in developing a ‘low cost’ vaccine with AstraZene ca, or Baylor College of
Medicine, Texas with its patent -free CORBEVAX vaccine (OECD, 2021[12]). This was less the case for
several other vaccines, including the mRNA 15 vaccines that were developed by b iotech companies in
partnership with the pharmaceutical industry, albeit on the back of long-term public investment in academic
research (Dolgin, 2021 [24]). The commercial return for several of these v accines was assured by prior
procurement commitments from individual countries in return for preferential provision, with equitable
worldwide access a secondary consideration (OECD, 2021 [2]). Despite e fforts by the World Health
Organization (WHO), COVID -19 Vaccines Global Access (COVAX) and other organisations, many
countries are still deprived of equitable access to vaccines (see also Chapter 1 for an overview of the
current status of COVID-19 vaccine development).
There has been less success in developing new therapeutics
With several effective vaccines developed using different technologies, and tested and rolled out in record
time, the vaccine story is nevertheless an excellent demonstration of what can be done when academia

===== PDF_PAGE 138 =====
136 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

and industry combine resources. The process of developing antiviral therapies has been less positive:
moving promising compounds from the laboratory to the bedside continues to be a challenge owing in part
to issues around ownership and appropriation of commercial returns.16 These challenges mirror those that
prevail in the development of antibiotics and there are lessons that can be learned from this field, such as
the use of novel market guarantee and procurement mechanisms, and new not-for-profit business models
that might be more broadly applicable for the provision of essential medicines during crises and beyond
(Lobanovska and Pilla, 2017[25]), (OECD, 2021[3]).
Many new partnerships were transdisciplinary
The response to COVID -19 was characterised by the creation of new partnerships and networks that
engaged actors beyond academia and industry in developing solutions for a diverse rang e of practical
challenges.17 Many of these joint activities were truly transdisciplinary – integrating knowledge and
perspectives from different science disciplines and different sectors (business, the public sector and civil
society). Establishing trust be tween different actors has proved to be the critical factor in getting such
arrangements to function effectively. Not surprisingly, many of them relied on existing relationships, and
involved institutions and organisations that were well respected in their respective sectors.18 Funding such
transdisciplinary activities was a challenge in many countries as they do not fit neatly with traditional
research-funding schemes, which tend to focus on specific research domains and recognised public
research providers such as universities or public research institutes. In some cases, existing in -house
institutional funds were used, or (as in Ireland) “one-stop-shop” emergency research-funding mechanisms
were established to enable multiple actors to apply for joint projects.19
Citizen science was also an important part of the pandemic response
Citizen science – defined in this context as the engagement of citizens in research activities – contributed
in important ways to many aspects of the pandemic response. Much of the data used to understand the
pandemic “belonged” to individuals. Some of the data were not just donated but also collected by citizens,
for example by using apps that were themselves sometimes developed by citizen scientists.23 Digital tools
were also used to organise a number of “hackathons” – crowdsourcing events open to multiple actors
(including citizens) that focused on applied research or solutions to specific challenges (Paunov and
Planes-Satorra, 2021[26]). Nevertheless, recognising citizens as true partners in research raises sensitive
issues about scientific expertise and power relations between experts and lay persons. The identification
and professional recognition of “long COVID” is illustrative in this regar d (see section on public
communication and engagement). There is still some way to go before academia recognises the full value
of citizen science and embraces citizens not just as data collectors, but also as purveyors of expertise and
knowledge in co-designing and co-producing research.
Disciplinary silos hindered co-operation between science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM), and social sciences and humanities (SSH)
Just as the pandemic shed light on the power relations between experts/scie ntists and citizens, it also
highlighted the differences between science disciplines, most notably STEM and SSH. There has been
criticism of the focus on numbers, numerical models and indicators in assessing and communicating the
pandemic’s progression, to the detriment of more qualitative research insights that could help explain
infection patterns (Bardosh et al., 2020[27]) (see section on science advice). Pandemic modelling largely
ignores important insights from behavioural research that do not easily fit into conventional statistical
models.20 Part of the challenge is that quantitative and qualitative data from SSH are oft en not openly
available. Where they are available, they are frequently not well described or structured and, in the absence
of common standards, are difficult to integrate with data from other sources. Where SSH and STEM have
worked effectively together, s uch as in transdisciplinary research projects and some science advisory
systems, this has generated valuable new insights for fighting the pandemic in a more holistic manner.

===== PDF_PAGE 139 =====
 137
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Disciplinary silos within research institutions and funding agencies have hampere d the inter - and
transdisciplinary research that has been required during the pandemic and will be necessary to address
complex societal challenges in the future (OECD, 2020[18]).
A globally inclusive response to the pandemic has remained elusive
The pandemic has been truly global in nature. It has been clear from the outset that no single country will
be safe until all countries are safe. Intergovernmental bodies, most notably WHO, and related international
scientific networks, such as GLOPID -R, have tried hard to co -ordinate the global research effort.
International RIs, networks and collaborations that existed prior to COVID -19 have been mobilised to
support pandemic monitoring, identify research needs, and establish global research priorities and
agendas. While researchers from all over the world have collaborated with each other regardless of their
countries’ geopolitical and ideological differences (see Chapter 2), the strategic global co -ordination of
research has not been immune to such differences. The WHO research agenda for COVID -19 was
established early in the pandemic, following consultation with leading experts from many countries (WHO,
2020[28]). It undo ubtedly influenced many national research agendas, although this influence has not
always been fully acknowledged. However, co -ordinated action to implement the global agenda was
lacking, with governments competing rather than co-operating. It became a matter of national pride for the
largest economies to have the best data sets and epidemiological models, produce their own vaccines, or
lead their own clinical trials. 21 In the meantime, LMICs – which wanted to co -operate but struggled to
compete – were largely left behind (or sometimes invited to host clinical studies led by other countries).
The lack of political will to adopt a more global and inclusive approach to managing the pandemic was
accentuated by a dearth of mechanisms allowing national research fu nders to truly co -operate and
collaborate. While scientists do collaborate internationally, public research funding rarely crosses borders.
There exist very few global RIs and, although international co -operation around data management and
access is common in some scientific domains, it is not the norm in many fields.
Recommendations
1. Promote collaboration across disciplines and countries. Major global challenges cannot be fully
addressed by a single scientific domain or country; shared RIs and digital tech nologies provide
powerful tools to make effective links.
2. Adopt and promote a sociotechnical framing for solutions-focused research that addresses grand
societal challenges and complex crises, recognising these cannot be adequately addressed by
technology alone.
3. Recognise that citizen engagement and trust in science is critical to effective crisis response;
promote citizen science and transdisciplinary research that addresses citizens’ “lived
experiences”.
4. Establish international funding mechanisms, trusted relationships and scientific networks now that
can respond to existing and future crises. It is important to build on what already exists, avoiding
excessive duplication while recognising that a degree of redundancy can increase the overall
resilience of a global system.
5. Address barriers to co -operation across disciplines and sectors, i.e. academia, government, the
private sector and civil society. Much can be learned from successful co -operation efforts during
the pandemic, but sustaining these over the longer term may require significant changes to
academic culture, structures, incentives and rewards.

===== PDF_PAGE 140 =====
138 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Science for policy (and decision-making)
Setting and implementing the research agenda
As discussed in the previous section, the international science community was engaged from the very
early stages with WHO in setting a global research agenda to track the course of the pandemic and develop
universally applicable interventions, such as diagnostics and vacc ines ( Figure 4.4). However,
implementing this agenda proved challenging. Even within Europe, most COVID -19-related research was
supported and performe d at the national level, either to further basic understanding of COVID -19 or
address national priorities and policy needs.
Figure 4.4. Setting global research priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic

Note: The initiatives are illustrative and are not a fully comprehensive representation of all established international initiative s mobilised to set
global research priorities during the COVID -19 pandemic response. Events outlined in orange represent times when formal priorities were
released in reports. Summarised priorities are listed.
Source: Adapted by the authors from the timeline of the WHO’s COVID-19 response (WHO, 2022[29]).
The biomedical community set the agenda early on
At the beginning, the pandemic was widely perceived as a mainly biomedical challenge, so that in most
countries, the biomedical community and its relevant research -funding institutions took the lead in
establishing a national resear ch agenda. At this incipient stage, the challenge was to understand the
disease and the likely progression of the pandemic, and to support the rapid development of diagnostic
and therapeutic tools. Crisis managers and policy makers across government needed scientific information
to understand what was happening, and what the options for mitigation were. To a large extent, the
research community was left to develop its own research agenda and in so doing, to estimate future policy
requirements based on past experience.
In early 2020, most OECD member countries rapidly implemented a variety of emergency funding measures
to expand existing biomedical research and support new research to address COVID -19 (Paunov and
Planes-Satorra, 2021[26]), (OECD, 2021[16]). As the pandemic developed and more scientific information

===== PDF_PAGE 141 =====
 139
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

became available, knowledge gaps were identified and specific policy questions formulated, albeit still mainly
focusing on biomedical issues. A number of basic questions, such as how the infectious agent was spread,
were only adequately answered several months into the pandemic, and some of the initial assumptions,
based on past pandemics, were probably given too much weight. Although the academic community held
active discussions on some of these issues, rigorous studies were surprisingly slow to be implemented. In
contrast, basic knowledge and understanding of the Sars-CoV-2 virus expanded enormously, leading to the
rapid development of diagnostic tools, followed in record time by vaccines.
Public health and social measures came into the picture later
Once the extent of the pandemic became clear and the necessary data collection systems and
epidemiological models were in plac e to generate reasonably reliable scenarios for its future course, the
main policy questions and evidence gaps related to PHSMs. The expertise required to address these
measures transcended biomedical research. In most countries, research on PHSMs barely featured in the
initial emergency research-funding priorities that had been largely established by the biomedical research
community; the response to COVID-19 from the social science research community was less of a priority
and less co -ordinated, with a pl ethora of small -scale projects being funded and critical knowledge gaps
remaining largely unaddressed. Thus, it was only in September 2021 that a rigorous study on the
effectiveness of face masks in preventing the spread of COVID-19 was published (Abaluck et al., 2022[30]).
While the effectiveness of measures such as lockdowns, school closures and “social bubbles” are context-
specific and very much predicated on behaviour and compliance, the lack of a r igorous evidence base to
inform the use of such policies has been a major challenge for managing the crisis (Glasziou, Michie and
Fretheim, 2021[31]) (Figure 4.5). Where efforts have been made to implement the necessary research, they
have sometimes been stifled by inflexible regulatory and ethical requirements that are not adapted to
emergency public health situations.22 There exists a need to establish baseline data on the effectiveness
and acceptability of PHSMs, which will often require large sample numbers and internationally co-ordinated
studies. As illustrated with clinical trials, establis hing the conditions for conducting social intervention
studies in untroubled times can be an important step in preparing for future crises.
Figure 4.5. COVID-19 evidence for health decision and policy making

Note: The Living Overview of Evidence (L.OVE) data platform aggregates evidence for systematic reviews from multiple different sources, including
the major scientific publication databases and clinical trial registries. It includes a dedicated collection for COVID-19 evidence, which classifies
published materials according to treatment categories and is continually up-dated. The importance of behavioural, environmental, social and systems
interventions (BESSI) in managing the epidemic is in contrast to the relatively limited amount of published scientific evidence in this field.
Source: Search results from the L.OVE database on COVID-19 Evidence (https://iloveevidence.com/) accessed on1 Dec.2022. Publications on
behavioural, environmental, social and systems interventions (BESSI) articles are a sub-group of the Prevention & treatment articles category.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/dqnvik
 0 20 000 40 000 60 000 80 000 100 000 120 000 140 000 160 000
Etiology
Diagnostic
BESSI
Prognosis
Epidemiology
Prevention & treatment

===== PDF_PAGE 142 =====
140 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The contrast between the rapid development and testing of new vaccines and the lack of evidence for the
use of PHSMs is reflected in how the pandemic was perceived from the outset, and which scientific
disciplines were (or were not) involved in setting the initial research agendas and priorities. The biomedical
research community did its job well, but the need to integrate existing knowledge and insights from a
breadth of other disciplines (including SSH) was not fully recognised, and the processes for achieving this
were lacking in most countries (see section on partnerships). In most OECD countries, interdisciplinary or
cross-agency bodies were only established after several months to provide advice on research needs and
broaden the evidence base for policy making (see section on science advice). 23 Moreover, the historical
legacy of relatively weak co -operation across the social sciences, in areas such as standards for data
management and access, impeded the integration and sy nthesis of this knowledge with other disciplines
(Research Data Alliance, 2020[11]).
Future preparedness measures should ensure societal engagement
Several countries conducted pandemic preparedness exer cises prior to COVID -19, although most were
led by public administrations and did not heavily involve the science community. For a variety of reasons,
these exercises – some of which were very insightful – seem to have been largely ignored or forgotten. 24
Only a small number of economies established formal public consultation or foresight exercises to inform
research priorities during the pandemic. 25 Citizens have valuable expertise and experience that can
improve the scientific response to crises (as discuss ed above in relation to long COVID). Their input will
be critical in preparing for future crises and establishing research agendas that address the needs of
different communities. In this context, non -governmental organisations, representing patient groups and
different (often marginalised) communities, have an important role to play in ensuring that the research
community pays the necessary attention to critical issues such as health inequalities or access to
indigenous knowledge. Trusted civil society par tners have a role play both in co -designing research
agendas and co -producing the research that will allow a more inclusive response to ongoing and future
crises.26
Recommendations:
1. Ensure better planning and co -ordination between research actors and author ities with
responsibility for policy making and crisis response. This starts with joint risk assessment and
preparedness exercises, feeding into improved mechanisms and processes for working together
during crises.
2. Establish more effective two -way communi cation mechanisms and processes to alert policy
makers to the implications of scientific research and analysis (e.g. early in a crisis) and ensure that
research is conducted to address urgent policy questions (often later in a crisis).
3. Ensure that emergenc y research agendas are not too narrowly focused and address all aspects
of a crisis from a scientific perspective; adopt more inclusive co -design approaches in identifying
research priorities so that citizen concerns are considered and addressed as necessa ry.
4. Adopt a research-portfolio approach not only to support different aspects of research that directly
address an immediate crisis, but also to ensure that the fundamental scientific knowledge base
across all scientific domains continues to expand as a motor for socio-economic development and
basis for responding to future crises.
5. Ensure that national and international research agendas focus strongly on health
inequalities/social determinants of health, recognising that public health (and other) crises te nd to
affect disproportionately individuals with pre -existing health conditions; likewise, prioritise the
collection of baseline data and rigorous evaluation of PHSMs for specific contexts.

===== PDF_PAGE 143 =====
 141
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Science advice
The interface between science and policy making is complex. It operates at different scales and involves
multiple actors, including scientists, policy makers, risk analysts and crisis managers. As mentioned in the
introduction to this chapter, scientific expertise and evidence were required to respond to multiple different
policy demands during the COVID -19 pandemic. Scientists involved in providing policy advice were also
often expected to play a role in communicating directly with the public. COVID -19 highlighted the critical
importance of trust between the various actors within science advisory ecosystems and the public at large.
In ideal situations, a virtuous triangle of trust between science, politics and the public was established; in
practice, most countries struggled to maintain this trust over the duration of the crisis (Jasanoff et al.,
2021[32]). In the absence of such trust, sound scientific evidence was either poorly taken up into policies
and/or evidence-based policies were poorly taken up by significant sections of the public.
There exist as many different ways of organising science advice as there are OECD countries, although
two broad categories of centralised or distributed systems have previously been described (OECD,
2018[4]). Both include a mix of permanent and ad-hoc structures and may, or may not, report to the centre
of government through a chief science advisor (CSA). Often, government -employed risk managers play a
critical intermediary role in interpreting scientific evidence for their political masters. Many ministries have
considerable in -house scientific expertise and their own science advisory structures and, in some
economies, the health ministry played the lead role in managing the COVI D-19 crisis and advising
government more broadly.
Distinctions between science advice and public policy were often blurred
Scientific evidence is only one input into policy making. There exists an important distinction between the
roles of scientific advi sors, who provide evidence to inform policy, and policy makers, who use this
evidence as one of multiple considerations in deciding policy action. In a rapidly evolving crisis such as the
COVID-19 pandemic, this distinction can be difficult to maintain and , where policies are unpopular,
“following the science” can quickly revert to “blaming the science” (Greer et al., 2022 [33]). This is
exacerbated when the science itself is uncertain and there are divergent views within the science
community, as was the case for many issues relating to COVID -19. Science advisors were often at the
frontline, having to defend or explain policy actions for which they were not responsible. At the same time,
scientists did not hesitate to publicly criticise some of these policies when they conflicted with their own
scientific views. For example, the initial decision to close schools in some economies w as based on best
available, but incomplete, scientific evidence concerning COVID-19 transmission and also had to take into
account many other socio -economic factors that were weighted differently in different contexts. This was
not a purely scientific deci sion, although it was frequently portrayed as such in the public discourse, and
many scientists voiced their opposition publicly.
In some jurisdictions, individual science advisors, e.g. CSAs or chief medical officers (CMOs), had more
or less direct influ ence or control over certain policy decisions, whereas in others, a distance was
maintained between advisory and decision -making functions. In this regard, there exists an important
distinction between scientists employed directly by government (e.g. CSAs, CMOs or directors of national
public health institutions), who may be mandated to directly advise on (or make) policy decisions, and
independent academic scientists (e.g. chairs and members of ad-hoc scientific advisory committees), who
are invited to pro vide advice to inform policies (MacAulay et al., 2021[34]). Being clear on the roles and
responsibilities of individual scientific advisors and advisory committees, including any direct role in policy
formulation and decision -making, is critical during a crisis (OECD, 2015 [35]). While it is important that
government scientists are able to express disagreement and dissent with their political masters in relation
to scientific evidence, they are also limited by their mandate and responsibilities towards their employer
(National Science and Technology Council, 2022 [36]). Independent advisors from academia have more
freedom in this respect, and have a major responsibility to ensure the rigour and completeness of the

===== PDF_PAGE 144 =====
142 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

evidence that informs policy. In a well -functioning advisory system, maintaining the balance between the
roles of government scientists and independent a cademic scientists is critical; this is particularly true in a
complex emergency such as the COVID -19 pandemic, where multiple scientific advisory structures may
operate at different scales and with different remits (OECD, 2018[4]). Policy makers, scientists and the
public at large need to develop a clearer understanding of the role of science in policy making, and how
this operates in different jurisdictions.
A hierarchy of evidence emerged that favoured numerical data
As indicated previously, the early stages of the pandemic were characterised by the rapid mobilisation of
the biomedical research community, which established the early research agendas and dominated the
policy advisory processes. National and internation al scientific advisory committees mainly comprised
researchers, epidemiologists, virologists, statisticians and mathematical modellers, with little room for
behavioural and social sciences or humanities at the main table. Over time, as policy questions bec ame
clearer and the knowledge gaps were recognised, additional expertise was either brought to the main table,
invited to set out its own table or simply self -organised to provide the necessary inputs. 27 However, the
hierarchy of evidence that had been established from the outset, with a particular emphasis on “objective”
numerical indicators, such as the “R factor”, was difficult to resist, and social sciences have continued to
struggle to make their voice heard in many contexts (Bardosh et al., 2020 [27]). As discussed earlier,
members of the SSH community were perhaps also less well-organised than their biomedical counterparts
to respond collectively at the international level and influence the main policy messages coming from WHO
and similar bodies that either directly or indirectly impacted national agendas.
Scientific consensus was often elusive under conditions of uncertainty and evidence gaps
The novelty of the infectious agent, the scale of the cr isis and the absence of a prior knowledge base
meant there was huge scientific uncertainty in the early stages of the pandemic. This decreased over time
as fresh evidence was generated, data collection became more comprehensive, and models were refined
to integrate a greater range of relevant variables. However, the SARS -Cov-2 virus has turned out to be
highly unpredictable. Data gaps persist, particularly for certain countries and population groups, and
pandemic models struggle to integrate behavioural ins ights, even when these are available. 17 The result
is that there continues to be considerable uncertainty associated with much of the ‘best available’ scientific
evidence that informs policy making. There are also different views within the scientific comm unity as to
the value of some of this evidence and, in particular, how it is translated into policy and decision -making.
Hence, in the first few months of the pandemic, scientists could be heard advocating both for and against
the use of face masks, and th ere have been several highly publicised disagreements by “experts” about
the value of different COVID -19 treatments. While such differences in opinion are a normal part of the
scientific process, the challenge in a crisis like COVID -19 is to manage them in such a way as to ensure
that the ‘best available’ evidence is clear and can inform policy while additional evidence is collected, and
at the same time, maintain public confidence and trust in science.
COVID-19 has taught us that reaching a scientific con sensus on some of the critical issues in a complex
crisis is not always possible, and that scientific uncertainties and ambiguities need to be openly discussed
and debated (see Section 3.3.3 on science communication). Where advisory processes have not been
completely transparent, or the scientific evidence informing policy has not been made openly available,
this has led to considerable unease within both the scientific community and the public. 28 A lack of
transparency, openness and accountability provides the ideal conditions for the development of conspiracy
theories by those with an active interest in undermining science. In some economies, dissatisfaction with
the transparency of the formal advisory processes led to the spontaneous creation of alternativ e science
advisory mechanisms.29

===== PDF_PAGE 145 =====
 143
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The scientific response to the pandemic was “data -driven”; similarly, the policy response was dependent
on having timely – ideally “real-time” – access to the necessary scientific data. The availability of data, and
the ability to analyse and interpret them, were crucial for providing sound scientific advice. Two critical
issues previously discussed in this chapter are worth emphasising again with respect to science advice:
1. Data gaps and biases . A lack of data from many c ountries, and from marginalised or vulnerable
groups within countries, has translated into significant gaps in understanding the global epidemic
and in the neglect of certain high-risk populations, such as migrants and homeless groups. In some
countries, existing social surveys have been adapted or new data collection studies have been
implemented to address specific data gaps.11 However, even when inclusive data exist, there can
be significant regulatory challenges to disaggregating them to identify particular population groups,
severely limiting their usefulness.
2. Integration and synthesis of information and data from different sources . While many different
disciplines and sectors have worked to make data FAIR, regulatory frameworks and privacy
concerns of ten limit the integration of data from these different sources (OECD, 2020 [14]). In
addition to addressing technical and regulatory issues, there exists a need to develop the mindset,
skills and science-based methodologies required to mediate and synthesise data and knowledge
from different sources under emergency response timelines. Close engagement between
disciplines using different and sometimes conflicting theories, terminologies and research
approaches can generate tension. Emphasising and improving mediation and consensus-building
abilities for both scientific experts and policy makers can help mitigate these tensions (Mulgan,
2021[37]).
International co-ordination around science advice has been patchy
Previous OECD work on scientific advice in crises identified systemic challenges for transnational co -
operation and exchange of information (OECD, 2018[4]). Principal among these were:
1. a lack of domestic capacity in many countries
2. a lack of shared understanding of different advisory structures and mechanisms
3. a need for mutual respect and trust across countries.
It was also noted that crisis preparedness exercises have tended to focus on operational aspects and the
role of crisis managers, and have rarely included scientists from outside government. All these issues were
clearly apparent in relation to COVID-19 (OECD, 2020[38]). Science advice was required at different scales,
from local to national, regional and global, but a lack of co-ordination was evident both within30 and between
countries, resulting in a lack of mutual learning.
No international agreement has been reached on some of the fundamental indices that have guided
COVID-19 policies in all countries, such as the criteria for attributing a death to COVID -19, or how to
measure the incidence and prevalence of infection (OECD, 2020[15]). Thus, drawing rigorous comparisons
and monitoring the effectiveness of policy interventions has been difficult, even across countries with
abundant data. Moreover, many countries have been unable or unwill ing to share data. WHO health
regulations provide a broad framework for the sharing of data during public health crises. WHO has worked
with scientists to define international priorities for policy attention (see previously) but recognition has been
poor in many countries, either owing to a lack of capacity or political will. This gap has been filled in some
areas (e.g. genomics) by bottom-up science projects, but these have been largely dependent on existing
infrastructure and relationships established on a voluntary basis prior to COVID -19. Hence, despite the
best efforts of international infrastructure networks (e.g. ELIXIR and partners) and scientific co -ordination
structures (e.g. GLOPID-R), substantial data gaps persist. Moreover, the use of international data to inform
national policies has not always been sensitive to the perspectives of the countries from which the data
originated. This was notably the case when South African scientists openly shared data on emerging

===== PDF_PAGE 146 =====
144 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

COVID-19 variants, leading some c ountries to take unilateral action to prevent travel to and from
South Africa (The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2022[39]).
Co-operation between countries in relation to science advice during the pandem ic has tended to reflect
prior political and economic alliances. Both the Group of Seven (G7) and the Group of Twenty (G20) made
science-based declarations in the early stages of the pandemic, as did several public health monitoring
and co-ordination structures in Europe and other regions.31 As described earlier, WHO has its own science
advisory mechanisms and released data and advice for all countries. In this respect, it has tried to provide
a global scientific perspective and fulfil a global co -ordination role. Many of the scientific experts involved
with WHO have played a leading role in providing scientific advice at the national or sub-national level and
informally, this has helped to provide some coherence. However, for a global crisis, whose effects c annot
be isolated to individual countries, the relative lack of effective international co -ordination around science
advice has been striking (Piper, Gomis and Lee, 2022[40]).
Recommendations
1. Ensure that the full breadth of relevant scientific knowledge from different disciplines is readily
available and taken into account to inform policy decisions. This begins with having the right people
in the room, but also requires mechanisms for consensus-building and knowledge synthesis.
2. Ensure transparency and openness in science advisory procedures, acknowledging uncertainty
and differences in scientific opinion. Holding open meetings, publishing full records of proceedings
in a timely fashion and clearly pre senting uncertainties and unknowns in public communications
can all play a role in achieving this.
3. Establish procedures to improve real -time data collection and analysis in different scientific
domains and enable information synthesis across domains with t he aim of effectively informing
policy makers.
4. Protect the autonomy and independence of science from political interference while at the same
time ensuring that advisory processes are responsive to policy needs and societal concerns. The
roles and responsibilities of science advisors, and the status and remit of different advisory bodies,
should be clearly defined and understood.
5. Improve co -ordination of science advice across different scales, both between and within
countries, and provide the necessary su pport to LMICs to build sustainable science advisory
systems that leverage international expertise.
Public communication and engagement
The COVID-19 crisis has monopolised the public discourse worldwide for almost three years and continues
to be a dominan t subject of public debate in many countries. Science and science -based policy
interventions have been the main focus for much of this communication activity. Scientists have become
public celebrities in some countries, attracting both praise and criticism depending on the messages they
communicate and how they are perceived by different sectors of society. In extreme cases, this has led to
threats of violence, with measures needing to be taken to ensure the security of individual researchers and
their institutions (Halverson et al., 2021[41]).
Building and maintaining public trust has been a critical challenge
The pandemic represented a new situation in terms of science communication, in that it is not just exciting
breakthroughs and well -established facts that are being communicated to the public at the end of the
scientific process, but rather the process itself that is in the public spotlight. The differing assumptions,
hypotheses, uncertainties and corrections that are a normal part of how science advances are publicly

===== PDF_PAGE 147 =====
 145
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

exposed and widely discussed. Debates on technical issues that would normally be expected to take place
within the scientific community have become legitimate topics for open, sometim es heated, discussion on
social networks. At the same time, many citizens who would not normally consider themselves scientists
have rallied to the cause and contributed to the scientific evidence base that has informed policy
interventions. As previously highlighted, citizen engagement – or citizen science in the broadest sense –
has made many important contributions, from the development of apps and collection of data to the
identification of long COVID (Provenzi and Barello, 2020 [42]). Responsible and effective science
communication and citizen engagement help establish public trust in both science and evidence -based
policies. Building and maintaining this trust has been a critical challenge for scien ce policy makers during
the pandemic and will continue to be in the face of other complex societal challenges.
Traditional and more novel communication intermediation approaches were important
A variety of intermediaries are engaged in the public communica tion of science, from journalists and
mainstream media to social media platforms. They play a critical gatekeeping role at the interface between
science and different publics. Where good working relationships between science and these intermediaries
have b een established, particularly where a variety of intermediaries target different audiences, the
dissemination of rigorous scientific information has generally been effective. 32 While for some audiences
in some countries, access to well communicated scientific information from trusted and authoritative bodies
satisfies their main demand, it has become clear during COVID -19 that many sections of society have
greater expectations and needs.33 Many citizens have specific questions relating to their particular contexts
and have “lived experiences” of the pandemic they would like to be considered. For these groups, top -
down delivery of scientific “facts” is not enough: they need avenues through which they can question the
facts, as well as engage with and contribute to the data and information on which these are based (Best
et al., 2021[43]).
The legitimacy of scientific communications rests not only on their scientific rigour, but also on the
processes by which they are derived and the way in which they are delivered. Accountability, transparency
and openness are equally important. An effective messenger or intermediary whom the target audience
trusts is an essential element of effective science communication (Seale et al., 2022[44]), and various digital
tools can provide a mechanism for effective two-way communication and engagement. It is not surprising,
then, that these digital communication tools and platforms have been the main focus of the science policy
initiatives implemented in many countries to improve science communication and address misinformation
during the pandemic. 34 Novel partnerships between multinational social media platforms (such as
Facebook), scientists and public health agencies have successfully and rapidly drawn upon resources and
expertise to test different communication strategies for different population groups. 35 Such approaches
have been used effectively to promote vaccination a nd address misinformation (Lesher, Pawelec and
Desai, 2022[45]). At the same time, there are many citizens who do not have access to, or do not routinely
use, digital tools. In most countries, traditional mainstream media (television, radio and newspapers) have
been the main communication tool and the only source of scientific information for large population groups.
The role of journalists has been critical and establishing trusted relationships between scientists and
journalists has also been an important focus for improving science communication in some countries
(Capurro et al., 2021[46]).36
Citizen engagement in science has been limited
Moving beyond communication towards deeper citizen engagement has been necessary to identify
priorities, accelerate research and address certain aspects of the pandemic. Citizen -led science was
important in identifying and describing long COVID. Some observers have note d a shift during the early
phases of the pandemic from the traditional model of citizen engagement – which mainly views citizens as
data suppliers – towards a more dynamic transdisciplinary model – which acknowledges the experience
and expertise of citizens, and their contributions across the whole research. However – at least in relation

===== PDF_PAGE 148 =====
146 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

to long COVID – it has been suggested that the openness and inclusivity that characterised the first year
of the pandemic response gave way to increasing polarisation as d ifferent parts of the scientific and
medical establishment appropriated and “professionalised” citizens’ knowledge.37 The term “long COVID”,
which was initially coined in a scientific publication produced by citizens, has become a point of tension
rather than a rallying point for the transdisciplinary research that will be needed to fully address a condition
that is affecting millions of people worldwide.
In other areas, partnerships between scientists and non -governmental or civic organisations have been
critical for accessing data and information from marginalised or neglected groups. Civic groups are often
better positioned than governments or scientists to identify the needs of the public and marginalised
population groups that might require specific ser vices. Fact -checking and contact tracing can also be
perceived as politicised activities that may create tension between governments and citizens. The general
public does not like governments policing information (Kostka and Habich -Sobiegalla, 2022 [47]). With
contact tracing, citizens may perceive that their privacy is being invaded, but they may better tolerate such
a policy if it is developed by a civic group they consider as trustworthy. Many citize n science or
crowdsourcing initiatives during COVID -19 owe their success to the provision of open and transparent
access to scientific and administrative data and resources.23
Knowledge deficits among citizens, scientists and communicators should be addressed
Effective science communication and citizen engagement hinge on scientific and digital literacy. As
discussed earlier in relation to science advice, there exists a lack of common understanding among policy
makers, scientists and the public at large co ncerning the role of science in policy making. The public also
lacks an understanding of how science operates (e.g. the distinction between peer-reviewed and pre-print
publications) and the digital literacy required to interpret data (e.g. grasping statist ical significance and
uncertainty). Most importantly, the scientific community itself does not always tap into the wealth of
knowledge and expertise from behavioural and communications sciences when developing its public
communication and engagement strate gies. Educating and training scientists and the public is important
to address these deficits. The pandemic has highlighted that facts alone are not sufficient to ensure
effective science communication, and that relevant expertise and perspectives are not unique to scientists,
particularly in relation to complex crises that affect the whole of society.
Recommendations
1. Support research integrity and efforts to ensure the rigour of the scientific information that informs
public debate. The research community must establish the necessary quality control processes to
ensure that publicly released research data and information can be trusted, and the caveats
around their usage are clear and transparent.
2. Recognise that scientific communication cannot be restricte d to hard data or “facts” – it must be
contextualised for different publics. Behavioural and social scientists can play an important role in
providing the necessary background for communicating relevant information to different
communities.
3. Support the science community in building trusted and sustainable relationships with a variety of
communication intermediaries, including journalists, non -governmental organisations and social
media platforms.
4. Address scientific misinformation by improving the digital an d scientific literacy of citizens and
policy makers. This requires a cross-governmental approach, although science agencies have an
important contribution to make in supporting and valuing public engagement and communication
activities.

===== PDF_PAGE 149 =====
 147
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

5. Recognise that the conditions for effective citizen engagement need to be established in
“peacetime”. This requires long-term support for citizen engagement as well as for open data and
information infrastructures that can be mobilised and used by citizens in times of crisis .
Looking forward: Maintaining the best, improving the rest
At the time of writing, the COVID-19 pandemic is not over. Much scientific research is still focused on this
area, although the attention of the public health and biomedical research community is also turning towards
new epidemics, such as monkeypox or Marburg virus disease. At the same time, the immediacy of the
climate crisis has become clearer, and biodiversity loss (on land and in the oceans) has accelerated, with
enormous implications for so cieties. Natural disasters linked with geopolitical crises and wars are
massively disrupting the global socio -economic system. Science has provided much of the evidence that
informs our understanding of how these crises have arisen and are evolving. Scient ists have developed
realistic future scenarios to inform the policy response to environmental challenges, and related concerns
such as energy and food security. The challenge today is for science to engage with other public - and
private-sector actors and citizens to accelerate the development and implementation of the new knowledge
and technological solutions required to address these issues. The scientific response to the COVID -19
pandemic can teach us a lot in this regard.
Science has a critical role to p lay in the transition to sustainable development trajectories. As with the
response to COVID -19, this will depend on refocusing, adapting, accelerating, enabling and scaling up
existing activities and processes. Four essential steps need to be taken to ach ieve this:
1. The importance of the full breadth of scientific knowledge needs to be clearly recognised. It will be
essential for policy makers to continue supporting a broad range of discovery science and
investigator-driven research, like that which underpinned the development of COVID-19 vaccines.
2. At the same time, there will need to be a significant shift from business -as-usual to rapidly scale-
up research approaches that focus on urgently required solutions for complex socio -technical
challenges. This m eans addressing some of the long -term structural challenges embedded in
academia. It means implementing new incentive and evaluation systems that promote inter - and
transdisciplinary research, and strengthening the three pillars of open science (access to scientific
information, access to data and public engagement).
3. Sustained, long-term investment is required to ensure that underlying infrastructures, resources
and methodologies are in place, and that inclusion and equity are embedded in science planning
and throughout the research process.
4. It will be important to address entrenched geographical, disciplinary and sectoral silos. Actors from
across count ries, scientific disciplines and sectors must come together to better understand,
navigate and develop solutions that advance the collective position, while engaging with conflicting
priorities and interests. Shepherding such complex interactions will require new approaches to
governance that are capable of facilitating, enabling, and uniting bottom -up and d ecentralised
initiatives with broader top-down and future-focused strategies (see Chapter 5 on mission-oriented
innovation policies for net zero).
Many of the required changes are already underway but are not yet being adopted at the necessary scale
and speed. There is considerable inertia embedded in science systems. Over the past decades, science
policy has mainly focused on incremental developments, which have enabled them to improve their
performance as judged by traditional output measures (such as bi bliometrics or patents). More radical
change is now necessary to spur science to engage with other societal stakeholders to produce the broader
range of outputs and solutions that are urgently required to deal with complex global challenges and crises.

===== PDF_PAGE 150 =====
148 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Many countries and organisations have initiated their own evaluations of their response to COVID-19. The
performance of science should be an important focus of such exercises. The four steps above, and the
more detailed thematic recommendations in this chapt er, provide a starting point for considering how
national science systems can – and must – evolve to function as part of a balanced, well -connected and
inclusive global science ecosystem. Sustainable investment will be critical, but this must be accompanie d
by institutional change and policy actions that support and incentivise science for the global good.

References

Abaluck, J. et al. (2022), “Impact of community masking on COVID-19: A cluster-randomized trial
in Bangladesh”, Science, Vol. 375/6577, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abi9069.
[30]
Baker, N., R. Van Noorden and A. Maxmen (2020), “Coronapod: The Surgisphere scandal that
rocked coronavirus drug research”, Nature, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-01790-y.
[10]
Bardosh, K. et al. (2020), “Integrating the social sciences in epidemic preparedness and
response: A strategic framework to strengthen capacities and improve Global Health
security”, Globalization and Health, Vol. 16/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12992-020-00652-6.
[27]
Besançon, L. et al. (2021), “Open science saves lives: lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic”,
BMC Medical Research Methodology, Vol. 21/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-021-01304-y.
[17]
Best, A. et al. (2021), “Institutional Distrust among African Americans and Building
Trustworthiness in the COVID-19 Response: Implications for Ethical Public Health Practice”,
Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, Vol. 32/1, pp. 90-98,
https://doi.org/10.1353/hpu.2021.0010.
[43]
Bonneton, M. et al. (2022), “A national platform for Covid-19 vaccine studies recruitment in
France: Covireivac volunteer’s characteristics”, Human Vaccines &amp; Immunotherapeutics,
Vol. 18/6, https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2022.2109364.
[51]
Buchanan, N. et al. (2021), “Remote Work During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Making the Best of
It”, Physiology, Vol. 36/1, pp. 2-4, https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00035.2020.
[1]
Callard, F. and E. Perego (2021), “How and why patients made Long Covid”, Social Science
&amp; Medicine, Vol. 268, p. 113426, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113426.
[62]
Capurro, G. et al. (2021), “Communicating scientific uncertainty in a rapidly evolving situation: a
framing analysis of Canadian coverage in early days of COVID-19”, BMC Public Health,
Vol. 21/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-021-12246-x.
[46]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022), “CDC COVID-19 Response Health Equity
Strategy: Accelerating Progress Towards Reducing COVID-19 Disparities and Achieving
Health Equity”, https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/health-equity/cdc-
strategy.html#:~:text=Overview,of%20health%20and%20healthcare%20disparities (accessed
on 6 March 2023).
[60]
Cohen, J. and Y. Rodgers (2020), “Contributing factors to personal protective equipment
shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic”, Preventive Medicine, Vol. 141, p. 106263,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2020.106263.
[54]

===== PDF_PAGE 151 =====
 149
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Dai, Q., E. Shin and C. Smith (2018), “Open and inclusive collaboration in science: A
framework”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2018/07, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2dbff737-en.
[6]
Diamond, D. and N. Toosi (2020), “Trump team failed to follow NSC’s pandemic playbook”,
https://www.politico.com/news/2020/03/25/trump-coronavirus-national-security-council-
149285 (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[53]
Dirnagl, U. (ed.) (2021), “The evolving role of preprints in the dissemination of COVID-19
research and their impact on the science communication landscape”, PLOS Biology,
Vol. 19/4, p. e3000959, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000959.
[9]
Dolgin, E. (2021), “The tangled history of mRNA vaccines”, Nature, Vol. 597/7876, pp. 318-324,
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-021-02483-w.
[24]
EC-OECD (2021), 2020-21 OECD Survey on STI policy responses to COVID-19 powered by
EC-OECD, https://stip.oecd.org/stip/covid-portal (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[61]
G20 (2020), Extraordinary G20 Leaders’ Summit: Statement on COVID-19,
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/43072/final-g20-leaders-statement-26032020.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[59]
G7 (2020), G7 Science and Technology Ministers’ Declaration on COVID-19,
https://www.state.gov/g7-science-and-technology-ministers-declaration-on-covid-19/
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[57]
Glasziou, P., S. Michie and A. Fretheim (2021), “Public health measures for covid-19”, BMJ,
p. n2729, https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n2729.
[31]
Gold, E. (2021), “The fall of the innovation empire and its possible rise through open science”,
Research Policy, Vol. 50/5, p. 104226, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2021.104226.
[23]
Greer, S. et al. (2022), “Centralizing and decentralizing governance in the COVID -19 pandemic:
The politics of credit and blame”, Health Policy, Vol. 126/5, pp. 408-417,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2022.03.004.
[33]
Halverson, P. et al. (2021), “Public Health Officials and COVID-19: Leadership, Politics, and the
Pandemic”, Journal of Public Health Management and Practice, Vol. 27/Supplement 1,
pp. S11-S13, https://doi.org/10.1097/phh.0000000000001281.
[41]
Ihlen, Ø. et al. (2022), “Transparency beyond information disclosure: strategies of the
Scandinavian public health authorities during the COVID-19 pandemic”, Journal of Risk
Research, Vol. 25/10, pp. 1176-1189, https://doi.org/10.1080/13669877.2022.2077416.
[56]
Jasanoff, S. et al. (2021), LEARNING FROM COVID-19: A 23-Nation Comparative Study of
COVID-19 Response, with Lessons for the Future of Public Health,
https://iserp.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/National%20Comparative%20Study%20Synthesi
s%20Paper.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[32]
Kostka, G. and S. Habich-Sobiegalla (2022), “In times of crisis: Public perceptions toward
COVID-19 contact tracing apps in China, Germany, and the United States”, New Media
&amp; Society, p. 146144482210832, https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448221083285.
[47]

===== PDF_PAGE 152 =====
150 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Kreiling, L. and C. Paunov (2021), “Knowledge co-creation in the 21st century: A cross-country
experience-based policy report”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers,
No. 115, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/c067606f-en.
[21]
Lesher, M., H. Pawelec and A. Desai (2022), “Disentangling untruths online: Creators, spreaders
and how to stop them”, OECD Going Digital Toolkit Notes, No. 23, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/84b62df1-en.
[45]
Lobanovska, M. and G. Pilla (2017), “Penicillin’s Discovery and Antibiotic Resistance: Lessons
for the Future?”,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315900937_Penicillin%27s_Discovery_and_Antibiot
ic_Resistance_Lessons_for_the_Future (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[25]
MacAulay, M. et al. (2021), “Under the spotlight: understanding the role of the Chief Medical
Officer in a pandemic”, Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, Vol. 76/1, pp. 100-
104, https://doi.org/10.1136/jech-2021-216850.
[34]
Mulgan, G. (2021), “The Synthesis Gap: reducing the imbalance between advice and absorption
in handling big challenges”, https://www.geoffmulgan.com/post/the-synthesis-gap-reducing-
the-imbalance-between-advice-and-absorption-in-handling-big-challenges (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[37]
National Science and Technology Council (2022), Protecting the integrity of government science,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/01-22-
Protecting_the_Integrity_of_Government_Science.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[36]
Nature Computational Science (2021), “Fighting COVID-19 with HPC”, Nature Computational
Science, Vol. 1/12, pp. 769-770, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-021-00180-2.
[19]
OECD (2021), “Access to COVID-19 vaccines: Global approaches in a global crisis”,
https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=1069_1069384-ewmqrw9sx2&title=Access-to-COVID-
19-vaccines-Global-approaches-in-a-global-crisis (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[2]
OECD (2021), “Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccines for developing countries: An equal shot at
recovery”, OECD Policy Responses to Coronavirus (COVID-19), OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/6b0771e6-en.
[3]
OECD (2021), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2021: Times of Crisis and
Opportunity, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/75f79015-en.
[16]
OECD (2021), Recommendation on Enhanced Access to Research Data from Public Funding ,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0347 (accessed on
5 March 2023).
[12]
OECD (2020), “Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 88, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0ca0ca45-en.
[18]
OECD (2020), “Ensuring data privacy as we battle COVID-19”,
https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/ensuring-data-privacy-as-we-battle-covid-
19-36c2f31e/ (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[14]

===== PDF_PAGE 153 =====
 151
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

OECD (2020), “Greater harmonisation of clinical trial regulations would help the fight against
COVID-19”, https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/greater-harmonisation-of-
clinical-trial-regulations-would-help-the-fight-against-covid-19-732e1c5c/ (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[22]
OECD (2020), “Providing science advice to policy makers during COVID-19”,
https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/providing-science-advice-to-policy-
makers-during-covid-19-4eec08c5/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[38]
OECD (2020), “Why open science is critical to combatting COVID-19”,
https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/why-open-science-is-critical-to-
combatting-covid-19-cd6ab2f9/ (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[15]
OECD (2018), Scientific Advice During Crises: Facilitating Transnational Co-operation and
Exchange of Information, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264304413-
en.
[4]
OECD (2016), “Research Ethics and New Forms of Data for Social and Economic Research” ,
OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 34, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5jln7vnpxs32-en.
[13]
OECD (2015), “Making Open Science a Reality”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Policy Papers, No. 25, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5jrs2f963zs1-en.
[5]
OECD (2015), “Scientific Advice for Policy Making: The Role and Responsibility of Expert Bodies
and Individual Scientists”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 21,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/5js33l1jcpwb-en.
[35]
Paunov, C. and S. Planes-Satorra (2021), “Science, technology and innovation in the time of
COVID-19”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 99, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/234a00e5-en.
[26]
Paunov, C. and S. Planes-Satorra (2021), “What future for science, technology and innovation
after COVID-19?”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 107, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/de9eb127-en.
[48]
Pearson, H. (2021), “How COVID broke the evidence pipeline”, Nature, Vol. 593/7858, pp. 182-
185, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-021-01246-x.
[49]
Perng, S. (2022), “Materialities of digital disease control in Taiwan during COVID-19”, Big Data
&amp; Society, Vol. 9/1, p. 205395172210973, https://doi.org/10.1177/20539517221097315.
[55]
Piper, J., B. Gomis and K. Lee (2022), ““Guided by Science and Evidence”? The Politics of
Border Management in Canada’s Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic”, Frontiers in Political
Science, Vol. 4, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2022.834223.
[40]
Provenzi, L. and S. Barello (2020), “The Science of the Future: Establishing a Citizen-Scientist
Collaborative Agenda After Covid-19”, Frontiers in Public Health, Vol. 8,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2020.00282.
[42]
Research Data Alliance (2020), RDA COVID-19 Recommendations and Guidelines on Data
Sharing, https://doi.org/10.15497/rda00052 (accessed on 5 March 2023).
[11]

===== PDF_PAGE 154 =====
152 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Seale, H. et al. (2022), “The role of community leaders and other information intermediaries
during the COVID-19 pandemic: insights from the multicultural sector in Australia”,
Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, Vol. 9/1, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-
022-01196-3.
[44]
Seidler, A. et al. (2021), “The landscape of COVID‑19 trials in Australia”, Medical Journal of
Australia, Vol. 215/2, p. 58, https://doi.org/10.5694/mja2.51148.
[50]
The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2022), “Emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants: shooting the
messenger”, The Lancet Infectious Diseases, Vol. 22/1, p. 1, https://doi.org/10.1016/s1473-
3099(21)00770-2.
[39]
Thornton, I., P. Wilson and G. Gandhi (2022), ““No Regrets” Purchasing in a pandemic: making
the most of advance purchase agreements”, Globalization and Health, Vol. 18/1,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12992-022-00851-3.
[52]
UK G7 (2021), “100 Days Mission to Respond to Future Pandemic Threats”,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/100-days-mission-to-respond-to-future-
pandemic-threats (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[58]
Verdugo-Paiva, F. et al. (2022), “COVID-19 Living Overview of Evidence repository is highly
comprehensive and can be used as a single source for COVID-19 studies”, Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, Vol. 149, pp. 195-202, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2022.05.001.
[8]
Veron, P. and M. Di Ciommo (2020), “Fit for purpose: The EU’s role in global health in the era of
COVID-19”, https://ecdpm.org/work/fit-for-purpose-the-eus-role-in-global-health-in-the-era-of-
covid-19 (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[20]
WHO (2022), Timeline: WHO’s COVID-19 response,
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/interactive-timeline
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[29]
WHO, W. (2020), “A Coordinated Global Research Roadmap: 2019 Novel Coronavirus”. [28]
Wu, F. et al. (2020), “A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China”,
Nature, Vol. 579/7798, pp. 265-269, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2008-3.
[7]

===== PDF_PAGE 155 =====
 153
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Notes
1 Several earlier OECD reports have reviewed the scientific initiatives and policies introduced in the initial
phases of the COVID -19 pandemic response. See, for example, (OECD, 2021[16]), (Paunov and Planes-
Satorra, 2021[26]) and (Paunov and Planes-Satorra, 2021[48]). Additionally, a catalogue of country-submitted
COVID-19-specific science policies is available through the COVID-19 Watch portal of the EC-OECD STIP
Compass (https://stip.oecd.org/covid/).
2 Six international virtual workshops were organis ed in the context of the OECD ”Mobilising science in
response to crises: Lessons learned from COVID -19” project. These workshops addressed the following
topics: 1) research data; 2) research infrastructures; 3) the interface between academia and the privat e
sector; 4) research agenda-setting; 5) scientific advice; and 6) public communication and engagement. All
background materials and resulting reports can be accessed online ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/global-
science-forum.htm).
3 The COVID -19 Open Research Dataset (CORD -19) provided the basis for the CORD-19 Challenge
(https://www.kaggle.com/allen-institute-for-ai/CORD-19-research-challenge), a collaboration between NIH
and the Allen Institute that uses the Kaggle platform. The challen ge launches competitions in which the
community uses AI and machine learning to analyse the literature and come up with new insights in
response to specific questions. While the CORD -19 corpus is extensive, it does not include all articles
relevant to the pandemic; there are gaps, for example, in relation to social sciences and humanities (SSH).
There are also longer-term questions about its continuing availability and what will happen post-pandemic
(see also the workshop report on research data ( https://www.oecd.org/fr/sti/inno/improving-academia-
private-sector-interactions.htm).
4 Publications are identified as COVID-19 related based on the following PubMed search: ("COVID-19" OR
"COVID-19"[MeSH Terms] OR "COVID-19 Vaccines" OR "COVID-19 Vaccines"[MeSH Terms] OR "COVID-
19 serotherapy" OR "COVID-19 serotherapy"[Supplementary Concept] OR "COVID-19 Nucleic Acid Testing"
OR "covid -19 nucleic acid testing"[MeSH T erms] OR "COVID -19 Serological Testing" OR "covid -19
serological testing"[MeSH Terms] OR "COVID-19 Testing" OR "covid-19 testing"[MeSH Terms] OR "SARS-
CoV-2" OR "sars-cov-2"[MeSH Terms] OR "Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2" OR "NCOV"
OR "2019 NCOV" OR (("coronavirus"[MeSH Terms] OR "coronavirus" OR "COV"). Publications are identified
as diabetes related based on the following PubMed search: "diabete"[All Fields] OR "diabetes mellitus"[MeSH
Terms] OR ("diabetes"[All Fields] AND "mellitus"[All Fields]) OR "diabetes mellitus"[All Fields] OR
"diabetes"[All Fields] OR "diabetes insipidus"[MeSH Terms] OR ("diabetes"[All Fields] AND "insipidus"[All
Fields]) OR "diabetes insipidus"[All Fields] OR "diabetic"[All Fields] OR "diabetics"[All Fields] OR "diabets"[All
Fields]) Publications are identified as dementia related based on the following PubMed search:
"dementia"[MeSH Terms] OR "dementia"[All Fields] OR "dementias"[All Fields] OR "dementia s"[All Fields]
5 The European Alliance of Medical Research Infrastructures (AMRI) is a novel collaboration between three
European research infrastructure consortiums (ERICs): the Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources
Research Infrastructure (BBMRI)-ERIC; the European Advanced Translational Research Infrastructure in
Medicine (EATRIS)-ERIC; and the European Clinical Research Infrastructure Network (ECRIN)-ERIC. The
Alliance aims to streamline access to services, tools and expertise. During the COVID-19 response, AMRI
established a fast-response service to accelerate access to facilities and services.

===== PDF_PAGE 156 =====
154 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

6 The Analytical Research Infrastructures of Europe ( https://arie-eu.org/) is a consortium of 7 European
research networks that collaborate to address missions that have been ident ified in the European
Commission (EC) research programme “Horizon Europe”. The consortium has helped co -ordinate
European efforts across many aspects of the COVID-19 response, from identifying the virus to developing
countermeasures.
7 NHLBI CONNECTS (https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/science/collaborating-network-networks-evaluating-
covid-19-and-therapeutic-strategies-connects) is the US -NIH National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute’s
(NHLBI) Collaborating Network of Networks for Evaluating COVID -19 and Therapeutic Strategies. The
network was formed in response to the COVID -19 pandemic. It provides a centralised and adaptive
platform and has established master protocols to integrate all major NHLBI clinical trial networks.
8 During the COVID-19 pandemic, the UK-based Pirbright Institute supported the National Health Services
in building diagnostic testing capacity. It supplied c ritical infrastructure, staff and scientists while also
providing training to new staff on sample management, biosafety and scientific diagnostic procedures (see
the workshop report on Research Infrastructures ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/research-infrastructures-
mobilisation.htm).
9 Several clinical research infrastructures have provided support for developing and testing new diagnostics
and therapies during the COVI D-19 response. The European Clinical Research Infrastructure Network
established a COVID-19 Taskforce (https://ecrin.org/covid-19-taskforce) with national partners to perform
a variety of tasks. These in cluded developing a metadata repository for COVID -19 trials and a database
of fast -track approvals (regulatory, ethical, data protection) across European countries. The European
Research Infrastructure on Highly Pathogenic Agents ( https://www.erinha.eu/access-our-
services/covid19-services/) also provides targeted support for SARS -CoV-2 studies, including access to
various high -containment in -vitro and in -vivo capacities, pre -clinical research co -ordination, and
information on research protocols and design.
10 Participants in the OECD “priority setting and funding workshop” ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/priority-
setting-and-coordination-of-research.htm) attested that by November 2020, hundreds of clinical trials had
been registered, with many lacking the size or standardisation required to produce robust results. By
May 2021, more than 2 900 COVID-19-related clinical trials had been registered; however, many were
underpowered and lacked the necessary conditions for developing robust, statistically significant scientific
results (Pearson, 2021[49]), (Seidler et al., 2021[50]). The urgency of the situation in which the majority of
trials were launched resulted in significant duplication of efforts.
11 Aside from NHLBI CONNECTS (see Note 6), a variety of efforts have been undertaken to develop
COVID-19 vaccination and therapeutic platforms capable of co -ordinating and streamlining
countermeasure development and testing efforts. Randomised Evaluation of COVID-19 Therapy
(RECOVERY) is an international clinical trial run by the University of Oxford aiming to identify and assess
potential treatments for hospitalised COVID -19 patients (https://www.recoverytrial.net/). VACCELERATE
is a pan-European clinical research network (including 29 national partners in 18 EU Member States) that
co-ordinates the second and third phases of COVID -19 vaccine trials ( https://vaccelerate.eu/).
Accelerating COVID -19 Therapeutic Interventions and Vaccines (ACTIV) is a US -based public -private
partnership created to expedite the development of COVID -19-specific vaccines and treatments
(https://fnih.org/our-programs/ACTIV). In France, COVIREIVAC was established by the Innovative Clinical
Research Network in Vaccinology (I -REIVAC), with support from several other national organisations, to
enable academic and industrial COVID-19 vaccine trials (Bonneton et al., 2022[51]).

===== PDF_PAGE 157 =====
 155
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

12 The US COVID -19 High Performance Computing (HPC) Consortium ( https://covid19-hpc-
consortium.org/) is a network with member s from industry, academia, and federal laboratories and
agencies that share computing capabilities ranging from small clusters to large supercomputers. The
consortium was established in March 2020, originally as a US -based public-private partnership betwee n
the Office of Science and Technology Policy, the Department of Energy, the National Science Foundation
and IBM. Its goal is to provide a single point of access to HPC and cloud computing resources, technical
expertise and other forms of support to underpin research on COVID-19.
13 In Some countries, long-term investments in social -science data infrastructures and community -based
surveys proved important in ensuring that scientists and policy makers had timely access to the necessary
data. Examples from th e United Kingdom and South Africa were discussed at the project workshop on
scientific advice ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessonslearnedfromcovid-19.htm).
South Africa was able to draw on an extensive network of social science infrastructures to conduct timely
surveys on public perceptions of interventions. The United Kingdom was able to accelerate its regulatory
and ethical approval processes and rapidly adapt existing longitudinal household surveys to understand
the local characteristics of viral transmission and individual experiences.
14 The European life sciences infrastructure for biological information, ELIXIR, has suppo rted the co -
ordination and advancement of COVID-19 research efforts through services related to storing, sharing and
accessing relevant data, publications and computing resources ( https://elixir-europe.org/services/covid-
19). The European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership is a research partnership between
14 European and 16 African countries founded in 2003 ( https://www.edctp.org/). In 2020, the Partnership
launched an emergency funding call to support 24 international COVID-19-related research collaborations.
Since 2018, it has also supported ALERRT (African coaLition for Epidemic Research Response and
Training) and PANDORA -ID-NET (Pan -African Network for Rapid Research, Response, Relief, and
Preparedness for Infectious Disease Epidemics) in improving the pandemic preparedness and response
capacities of sub-Saharan African countries.
15 mRNA: Messenger RNA.
16 The COVID Moonshot project (https://postera.ai/moonshot/ ), an international open science consortium
of scientists, pharmaceutical research teams and students, is one of the few (at least partial) success
stories regarding novel COVID -19 therapeutics. The collaboration was developed bottom -up: it was
initiated through Twitter and supported at the institutional level by recognised stakeholders, including the
University of Oxford, the UK Synchotron Diamond Light Source and the Wellcome Trust. The project has
pioneered a novel approach to drug discovery, using informal and open collaboration in the absence of
formal contracts or ex ante intellectual property rights agreements. It has managed to leverage the
resources, knowledge and expertise of hund reds of scientists and other actors to develop and undertake
early-phase testing of several promising drug candidates. However, the project has struggled to find a
business model to move these products from the laboratory to the bedside, and in such a way as to provide
equitable and affordable access.
17 A number of these initiatives were presented as case studies in the September 2021 OECD workshop
on academia -private-sector interactions ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/improving-academia-private-
sector-interactions.htm), as well as in (Kreiling and Paunov, 2021 [21]). These cases illustrate some of the
novel collaboration models introduced to improve science-industry partnerships, many of which were also
characterized by the participation of community groups or citizens.

===== PDF_PAGE 158 =====
156 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

18 In Finland, the Fast Expert Teams initiative (https://oecd-opsi.org/covid-response/fast-expert-teams-vs-
covid-19-how-to-help-finland-avoid-paralyzing-when-experts-cannot-meet-f2f/) leveraged digital tools and
platforms to accelerate the development of trust across sectoral barriers, and align different expectations.
The project used an informal “snowball” approach to accelerate the engagement of new par ticipants.
19 To streamline and accelerate applications for research grants during the COVID-19 pandemic response,
several national agencies in Ireland shared the same application portal. Project selection and funding was
determined at the “back end” in accordance with funders’ specific mandates, but applicants submitted single
proposals (see workshop on academia -private sector interface (https://www.oecd.org/fr/sti/inno/improving-
academia-private-sector-interactions.htm).
20 The engagement of super -forecasting experts may help integrate a broader array of variables into
conventional statistical modelling efforts. Alternatively, the University of Hong Kong School of Public Health
has used epidemic nowcasting during the COVID -19 response to inform policy decisions. This
multidisciplinary approach has enabled scientists to assess and forecast transmissibility and epidemic size
with greater accuracy, and to identif y emerging variants (see workshop on research agenda setting,
(https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/priority-setting-and-coordination-of-research.htm).
21 Nationalism has been a major barrier to international pandemic preparedness and response activities.
Countries tend to prioritise only those activities that will advance domestic scientific standing and interests
(see workshop on research agenda setting ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/priority-setting-and-
coordination-of-research.htm). In addition, despite early consensus regarding the need for equitable
allocation of countermeasures, many developed countries used advanced purchasing agreements to
secure domestic supplies, delaying access for LMICs (Thornton, Wilson and Gandhi, 2022[52]).
22 For example, at tempts by the Norwegian Institute of Public Health to use randomized control trials to
assess the effectiveness of PHSMs during the pandemic were thwarted by regulations that require
individual consent from all participants (see workshop on research agenda sett ing,
(https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/priority-setting-and-coordination-of-research.htm).
23 Most OECD countries initially focused on engaging experts from the biomedical and life sciences fields before
it was recognised that broader disciplinary expertise was required to address some aspects of the evolving
pandemic. In some countries, including the Netherlands, dedicated behavioural and social science research
units were created, but they were not fully integrated into the formal apparatus informing policy makers (see
workshop on scientific advice (https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessonslearnedfromcovid-
19.htm).
24 For example, the 2017-21 US administration was criticised (Diamond and Toosi, 2020 [53]) for its failure
to effectively apply guidelines outlined in the Playbook for Early Response to High-Consequence Emerging
Infectious Disease Threats and Biological Incidents. The playbook was developed in 2016 by the National
Security Council in response to the country’s reaction to of the 2014 Ebola crisis. Similar pandemic
preparedness exercises – often focused on the influenza virus – were conducted in other countries,
including the United Kingdom, and at the European level, but the weaknesses identified, including
shortages of protective equipment, were not addressed prior to COVID-19 (Cohen and Rodgers, 2020[54]).

===== PDF_PAGE 159 =====
 157
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

25 Based on an analysis of countries’ COVID-19-specific science policies using the COVID-19 Watch portal
of the EC -OECD STIP Compass ( https://stip.oecd.org/covid/), only a small number of policies from the
European Union, Germany and Belgium referenced foresight, preparedness or risk assessments.
Regarding public communication and engagement, the reported policies focused mainly on making
science advice accessible to the public, and only a handful explicitly engaged citizens.
26 In Chinese Taipei, the participation of civilians and civil society organisations in COVID -19 mitigation
activities has contributed in important ways to the initial success of the pandemic response. Civilians
voluntarily engaged in efforts to monitor and trace transmission of the virus. In addition, private individuals
and community groups led the development of inventory maps for personal protective equipment (Perng,
2022[55]) (see workshop on public communication and engagement ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/public-
communication-engagement-in-science.htm
27 For instance, like many OECD countries, behavioural science was not part of the initial response in the
Netherlands. The country’s Corona Behavioural Unit only came together in late March 2020, in response
to rapidly increasing case numbers and recognition of the important role of human behaviour in the
pandemic response. However, the new group moved quickly, securing funding and research grants, and
assembling a scientific board over the course of several weeks (see workshop on scientific advice
(https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessonslearnedfromcovid-19.htm) and behavioural
science webinar, https://ianphi.org/news/2020/covid-19-behavioral-science-webinar.html).
28 Norwegian public health officials adopted several tactics to communicate transparently regarding the
COVID-19 response, including active participation in televised debates and direc t engagement with the
public through social media platforms (Ihlen et al., 2022 [56]) (see workshop on scientific advice
(https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessonslearnedfromcovid-19.htm).
29 In the United Kingdom, concerns about the methods and procedures of the government Science
Advisory Group on Emergencies (SAGE) led to the creation of an “alternative SAGE”, which had no official
mandate but was chaired by a former CSA. In the Netherlands, dissatisfaction with the formally mandated
Outbreak Management Team led to creation of a shadow science advisory process by the so -called Red
Team (see workshop on scientific advice ( https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessons
learnedfromcovid-19.htm).
30 Access to comparable data, disaggregated by location, was important to develop science advice and
policies targeted to the local situation. However, some countries found this challenging for a variety of
reasons, including poor compatibility between federal and local processes. For example, participants in
the workshop on scientific advice noted that in Australia, data gaps contributed to a lack of policy co -
ordination and integration across different levels of governance ( https://www.oecd.org/
sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessonslearnedfromcovid-19.htm).
31 The “G7 Science and Technology Ministers’ Declaration on COVID -19”, released on 28 May 2020,
provides a shared vision for the use of science and technology to develop effective countermeasures,
global co-ordination of R&D and improved access to data (G7, 2020[57]). Under the UK G7 Presidency,
leaders also committed to a “100 Days Mission” targeting the development of diagnostics, therapeutics
and vaccines (UK G7, 2021 [58]). In November 2020, the G20 released the “Extraordinary G20 Leaders’
Summit Statement on COVID -19 recognising the global need for a transparent and science -based
response to COVID-19” (G20, 2020[59]).

===== PDF_PAGE 160 =====
158 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

32 In some countries, scientists were able to rely on connections with the news media that had been
established prior to the pandemic. For example, FactCheck Initiative Japan (https://en.fij.info/), established
in 2017, brings together scientists and journalists to verify online information. A number of new scien ce
communication initiatives were also launched in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the Royal
Society of Canada’s Task Force on COVID -19 (https://rsc-src.ca/en/themes/rsc-task-force-covid-19),
which has published over 150 opinion pieces in news publications (see workshop on public communication
and engagement (https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/public-communication-engagement-in-science.htm).
33 The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of health equity and social determinants of
health, which help explain why certain population groups were more severely affected. It is important to
take fuller account of these groups in the development of scientific advice, linking this to targeted
communication campaigns that address specific needs. The US Centres for Disease Control has taken
steps to integrate health equity into science activitie s across its portfolio, including the investigation of
underlying drivers such as racism (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022 [60]) (see workshop
on scientific advice (https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/scientificadviceincriseslessonslearnedfromcovid-
19.htm).
34 According to the snapshot of COVID -19-specific policies captured through the STIP Compass COVID -
19 Watch, digital tools and platforms made up the bulk of the communication initiatives policy makers
deployed to communicate or engage with the public. Approaches ranged from passive communication via
websites to more active e ngagement through social media and mobile applications, including WhatsApp
or chatbots (EC-OECD, 2021[61]).
35 Social media companies have been involved in a variety of initiatives to amplify validated scientific
narratives and address harmful or questionable claims across countries. For example, Facebook has: used
COVID-19 vaccine profile frames to improve visibility and trust of vaccines; supported users in exploiting
marketing tools for public health campaigns campaigns tailored to specific demographics; and subsidised
the advertisement budgets of trusted public health authorities (see workshop on Public communication and
engagement https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/public-communication-engagement-in-science.htm).
36 FactCheck Initiative Japan (https://en.fij.info/about/) is a coalition of academics, journalists and non-profit
organisations created in 2017 to address the risks posed by misinformation. During the COVID -
19 pandemic, the network focused on validating COVID -19 information originating in Japan and checking
questionable claims that had spread to Japan from abroad. Several national and international media
partners are engaged in the initiative, including SmartNews, Yahoo! Japan and BuzzFeed Japan.
37 The term “long COVID” was coined on Twitter in May 2020 by Elisa Perego, a social scientist
experiencing a chronic reaction to the virus (Callard and Perego, 2021[62]). Use of the term gained traction
in a matter of weeks. However, the condition or syndrome and its symptoms have been contested within
the scientific community and there have attempts to give it a variety of medical labels, with patients often
excluded from pertinent discussions (see workshop on Public communication and engagement
(https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/public-communication-engagement-in-science.htm).

===== PDF_PAGE 161 =====
 159
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Mission-oriented innovation policies are increasingly popular as a policy
response to meeting net-zero targets. They have clear objectives and
measurable targets, promote broader co-ordination of policy plans across
administrative silos, and better integrate various support instruments across
the different stages of the innovation chain than more traditional and
fragmented policy approaches. These policies remain unproven, however,
and early indications suggest they lack sufficient scale and reach to non-
STI policy domains to have wide-ranging impact. The challenge remains to
move these initiatives from effective co-ordination platforms to integrated
policy frameworks that mobilise and align a wide range of actors.
Overcoming many of the barriers – including administrative and legal rules,
accounting structures and governance models – requires changes that are
far beyond the reach of STI authorities alone and will need significant
political support.

5 Reaching Net zero: Do mission-
oriented policies deliver on their
many promises?

===== PDF_PAGE 162 =====
160 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Key messages
 A growing num ber of countries are experimenting with mission -oriented innovation policies
(MOIPs) to help them reach net -zero targets. Most of these have only been launched recently
and have yet to demonstrate their differential impact with respect to more traditional and
fragmented policy approaches. Providing evidence of their contribution to long -term objectives
in a timeline compatible with short- to medium-term political cycles is, however, a challenge for
most net-zero missions.
 This chapter uses a “theory of cha nge” policy framework to track the effects of 83 net-zero
missions, from their specific design features to their contribution to achieving net-zero. It shows
that net -zero missions produce some of their expected outputs and outcomes and in most
cases, represent a marked improvement over traditional science, technology and innovation
(STI) policy mixes. However, they are not yet well -suited to producing the needed
transformative changes to achieve net-zero.
 Net-zero missions entail a co -designed agenda, a dedicated governance structure and finally,
a tailor-made and integrated policy mix. Compared to traditional policy mixes, net-zero missions
are characterised by:
o Stronger orientation, with clearer objectives and measurable targets related to GHG
emission reduction – although only a few correspond to expected specific, measurable,
achievable, relevant and time-bound (SMART) goals. Such initiatives are characterised
by co-developed strategic agendas that are directly associated to financial resources
and implementation modes, which is rarely the case in other strategic frameworks.
o Broader co-ordination of policy plans across administrative silos, bringing together the
authorities in charge of research and innovation policy, and the “owners” of the
challenges they tackle – for instance, the policy and regulatory bodies in charge of
transport or environment. To date, however, budgets are not commensurate with the
transformative objectives of net -zero missions and originate almost exclusively from
public authorities in STI.
o Higher integration of various support instruments across the different stages of the
innovation chain, from supporting research to skill strengthening and, for some of them,
market deployment through price -based mechanisms and public procuremen t. A
significant value added of net -zero missions is their result orientation, which leads
mission partners to integrate societal needs and demands at different stages of the
mission life cycle.
 Building on these early results and learning from good pract ices, net -zero missions will
accomplish their transformative potential if they can find a way out of two common traps:
o The “STI-only trap”: despite displaying some systemic features, most net-zero missions
remain focused on supporting research and innovation, are led by STI authorities and
draw almost exclusively on STI funds.
o The “orientation trap”: so far, most net -zero missions have had success in defining
strategic agendas and setting up governance structures. Evidence of joined -up
implementation remains rarer and limited.
 The MOIP theory of change presented in this chapter should be further developed and
translated in to decision -support tools to facilitate public policy experimentation and
adaptive, real-time policy learning.

===== PDF_PAGE 163 =====
 161
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Introduction
Current STI policy and governance frameworks are unfit to help deliver sustainability
agendas
Despite technological progress that has helped lower the costs of low -carbon technologies and increase
their performance in areas such as buildings and transportation (IPCC, 2022[1]), it is increasingly clear that
“change as usual” is no longer an option to tackle systemic societal challenges such as climate change.
While 33 countries and EU Member States have set net-zero targets, mostly for 2030 and 2050, to attempt
to limit global warming to 1.5˚C by the end of the century, at the current rate of emission reduction, countries
are not on the path to meet their international commitments for 2030 ( Figure 5.1). Furthermore, in the
unlikely case that all countries will implement their 2030 pledges and continue at the same pace, recent
simulations show that global warming is likely to reach about 2.7°C by 2100 (IPCC, 2022[1]).
Figure 5.1. Gap between GHG emissions and 2030 national targets for selected countries, 1990-
2020, and linear projections 2021-30
In percentage of GHG emissions

Note: Annual difference between GHG emissions and NDC 2030 target is calculated by subtracting target estimates from GHG emissions each
year. The figure shows the annual difference as a percentage of GHG emissions in each year. GHG emissions levels are aligned to the scope
and unit of NDC targets, includi ng the coverage of sectors, gases and global warming potential factors (GWP). Emission levels are therefore
not directly comparable across countries. Projections are based on the trends observed during the last five years for each series of data; emission
data for China, – which are increasing rapidly – are not regular enough to allow projections.
Source: OECD (n.d.), International Programme for Action on Climate, Climate Action Dashboard, https://www.oecd.org/climate-action/ipac/
(accessed on 3 March 2022).
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/ht4rfx
Many countries are trying to translate their net -zero commitments into concrete actions, which requires
immediate deci sions (Jeudy-Hugo, Lo Re and Falduto, 2021 [2]). However, climate actions to date fall
significantly short of what is necessary to achieve these targets (Lebling et al., 2020[3]). Recent OECD work
highlights the marked levelling out of concrete climate policy measures across OECD countries,
particularly innovation-related policies (Criscuolo, Dechezleprêtre and Cervantes, 2023 [4]), (Kruse et al.,
2022[5]). International Energy Agency (IEA) data demonstrate a clear flattening of public expenditures for
research, design and development (RD&D) for low-carbon technologies as a percentage of gross domestic
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
EU (27) Japan United States
%

===== PDF_PAGE 164 =====
162 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

product since around 2010 (IEA, 2022[6]). This trend coincides with a slowdown of patenting in low-carbon
technologies (Criscuolo, Dechezleprêtre and Cervantes, 2022[7]).
Despite announcements regarding the increasing proximity to climate tipping points (OECD, 2022 [8]),
multiple pathways to limit global warming to 1.5°C are still available. These pathways correspond to various
mitigation approaches, with different combinations and timelines for the development and diffusion of social
and technological innovations (IPCC, 2022[9]). Both the diffus ion of currently available technologies, and
new advances and scale -up of those still in laboratories or at the demonstration stage, can help achieve
the 2030 emission -reduction targets (IEA, 2022 [10]). However, these will need to be combined with
behavioural, regulatory, political and social changes. Changes in a wide range of domains, involving
different communities on multiple levels, will have to co-evolve in conjunction towards similar objectives to
allow such co-ordinated systemic transformation.
In past decades, however, policies have mainly consisted of individual policy instruments targeting specific
market failures (Mazzucato, 2018[11]), for instance by raising the level of private R&D, supporting feasibility
or strengthening the knowledge base. This “one objective – one policy instrument” framework has resulted
in a fragmented policy and governance landscape that has exacerbated co -ordination problems. Without
a framework to co -ordinate different modes of intervention, these dispersed policy mixes are ill -suited to
bring about the systemic changes required to ensure the transition to net -zero (OECD, 2021[12]), (Hynes,
Lees and Müller, 2020[13]).
A wealth of “mission-oriented” systemic policy experimentations
Acknowledging the limitations of current policies to address “wicked” challenges such as climate change,
several countries are piloting systemic policy approaches that promote (to various degrees) cross -
governmental, cross-sectoral and multidisciplinary collaboration in STI policy formulation. These initiatives
consider linkages between issues that are generally treated separately within different “silos” to address a
specific challenge. In Norway, a country where many sectoral ministries and their agencies have
responsibility for their own STI policy, three agencies have since 2016 gathered their respective
instruments to fast -track the development, testing and deployment of new green energy solutions in a
single integrated scheme (Pilot-E). In France, the “Investments for the Future” programme (PIA)1, initiated
in 2010, was redesigned in 2020 to focus on specific technology areas through integrated support across
all stages of the innovation chain, from exploratory research to market deployment. Each of these so-called
“acceleration strategies” has its own strategic agenda, budget and governance structure, with a dedicated
inter-ministerial co -ordinator. In the United States, several agencies have been created to emulate the
“Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) model”, where a co-ordinated portfolio of projects
are proactively managed to solve complex energy or health -related challenges (among others). In the
energy area, the systemic dimension of these initiatives was enhanced in 2021 by integrating various
relevant programmes and agency schemes into “Energy Earthshots”, which adopt an “all-R&D-community”
approach to addressing complex challenges such as affordable grid storage for clean power and low -cost
clean hydrogen. Under different forms, systemic policy experimentations occur in many European
countries, in Asian countries and in Australia.
While these initiatives vary in terms of focus, scope and design, they have in common the goal of promoting
proactive action across disciplinary, sectoral and administrative silos to address collectively a challenge
too complex to be solved by any individual measure. They have generally been gathered under the “MOIP”
label, a concept that has attracted a great deal of attention from policy makers and analysts. OECD defines
MOIPs as a “co-ordinated package of policy and regulatory measures tailored specifically t o mobilise STI
in order to address well-defined objectives related to a societal challenge, in a defined timeframe”. These
measures may span different stages of the innovation cycle, from research to demonstration and market
deployment; feature a mix of su pply-push and demand -pull instruments; and cut across various policy

===== PDF_PAGE 165 =====
 163
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

fields, sectors and disciplines (Larrue, 2021 [14]). Using this definition as a reference, the OECD has
identified 83 net-zero missions in 30 MOIP initiatives implemented in 20 countries (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2. Map of MOIPs and their net-zero missions
An increasing number of countries have engaged in systemic policies to reduce GHG emissions

Note: For instance, Ireland currently operates two MOIP initiatives which include a total of 4 missions. The list of MOIP initiatives, as well as
their net-zero missions, is available at: https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/Online%20list%20of%20NZ%20missions.pdf.
This definition relates to an ideal type that can be characterised by three main features:
1. Strategic orientation: the main objective of MOIPs is to develop and set well -accepted objectives
regarding a complex challenge to be addressed, to lay the foundation for targeted and co-ordinated
collective action. While MOIPs are still often wrongly characterised as top -down, their objectives
can only be defined by involving and reach ing a consensus among a wide array of public and
private stakeholders.
2. Policy co-ordination: MOIPs co-ordinate the strategies and plans of various public authorities in
charge of different components (e.g. knowledge, technologies, funding, skills, regulati ons,
markets) that are essential to reaching collectively agreed objectives. These public authorities
belong to different policy fields (such as research, innovation and different sectors that “own” the
societal challenges, including energy, mobility and h ealth) and different levels of governance. Co -
ordination arrangements are negotiated in different types of governance bodies at the strategic and
operational level, as well as at the level of the overall initiative or specific mission.
3. Policy implementati on: MOIPs are implemented through a comprehensive mix of policy
interventions and various initiatives to support a range of activities (from research to market launch
and the acquisition of required skills) deliberately designed to achieve their objectives. For the most
part, these policies do not substitute, but rather build upon and co -ordinate pre -existing policy
interventions to tackle a specific challenge.

===== PDF_PAGE 166 =====
164 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

All national innovation systems include many components that perform various functions pertainin g to
these three dimensions (e.g. a hydrogen strategy, a cross -ministerial committee and a collaborative
programme). The main novelty of the MOIP approach resides in the proactive and intentional integration
of these components within a dedicated common in stitutional framework to tackle a selected challenge.
Concretely, a MOIP is a “platform for collective actions” that articulates, for each selected challenge, a
collectively developed agenda; a dedicated structure of governance for taking (and monitoring t he effects
of) common or mutually consistent decisions; and a tailor-made, integrated policy mix (Figure 5.3).
Figure 5.3. MOIPs as an integrated framework to steer, co-ordinate and implement collective action
toward net-zero

Can MOIPs help countries implement the sociotechnical changes needed to transition
towards net-zero?
MOIPs are reaching a critical pivotal time. While most of these policies are still at an early stage, there
already exists strong political demand to demonstrate results, not only because these initiatives are more
visible, but also because they have raise d high expectations and sometimes have larger budgets.
However, knowledge about the extent, the means and the conditions under which MOIPs produce the
expected impacts is still limited.
Although it is impossible to assess the effects of initiatives that established a goal for 2030 or beyond and
have been in existence for only two or three years, a first step is to validate the policy approach itself: to
what extent – and why – is a MOIP approach justified in comparison to existing strategic and policy
frameworks? In other words, legitimising the adoption of a MOIP approach requires capturing the benefits
of their systemic dimension to orient and co-ordinate plans, and take action.
A theory of change of net -zero missions has been developed to this end that s ets out the causal
relationship between net-zero missions and their expected outputs, outcomes and impacts (Box 5.1 and
Figure 5.4). This theory is us ed to analyse the database of 83 net-zero missions and 20 in-depth case
studies2. It also structures this chapter, providing insights on the contribution of net-zero missions to three
expected outputs, followed by three expected outcomes3. The chapter concludes by highlighting two traps
that net-zero missions will need to overcome if they are to fulfil their promise.

===== PDF_PAGE 167 =====
 165
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 5.1. A theory of change of net-zero missions
The OECD has studied and categorised the differe nt designs of MOIPs, as well as analysing and
benchmarking their main processes through cases studies (Larrue, 2021 [15])4. However, there exist
almost no evaluations of these policies that could provide evidence of whether they meet their ambitious
objectives. Building upon previous work on MOIP design, it is necessary to develop a “theory of change”
for MOIPs that will surface the causal relationships between the problems they tackle and their desired
goals, inputs, outputs, outcomes and impacts (Janssen et al., 2021[16]), (Hekkert et al., 2020[17]). In its
most general understanding, a theory of change is a set of beliefs about how change happens (Church
and Rogers, 2006[18]).
In the case of MOIPs, the theory of change seeks to capture their additional effects on top of those
produced by existing fragmented policy instruments, as they build upon and integrate existing policies.
The legitimacy of this policy approach, therefore, depends on successfully passing a stringent double
test: not only must they accomplish their missions, but they should do so mor e effectively and more
efficiently than would have been the case without them, or they should fulfil missions that are beyond
the reach of traditional approaches.
The net -zero theory of change ( Figure 5.4) describes how MOIPs are expected to produce their
impacts, in direct relation to their characteristics. It starts with the MOIP “design principles” as formalised
in previous OECD work (Larrue, 2021[15]) and presents the expected causal relationships to outputs
(i.e. the previously mentioned collectively developed agenda, dedicated governance structure and
integrated policy mix), outcomes and intended impacts. Building on the distinction between acceleration
and transformative missions (Kuittinen, Polt and Weber, 2018[19]), it is possible to distinguish two main
types of impact – system transformation and change acceleration..

===== PDF_PAGE 168 =====
166 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 5.4. The theory of change of a net-zero mission: From MOIP design principles to net-zero achievements

===== PDF_PAGE 169 =====
 167
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

What are the outputs of net-zero missions?
In direct relation to their design principles, MOIPs are expected to deliver three policy outputs: a collectively
developed strategic agenda, a dedicated governance structure to co-ordinate actions towards this agenda,
and a consistent packa ge of policy and regulatory interventions to implement the mission. This section
questions each of these outputs successively. Table 5.2 summarises the results of these missions.
Table 5.2. Synthesis of the main outputs of net-zero missions
Outputs
Net-zero mission effects Main results
A) Collective development of a strategic agenda to address a complex societal challenge
Clearer measurable objectives
and targets
Missions have enabled clearer goals to be set than in traditional programmes, although few correspond to the
expected “SMART” goals. Only half of these goals have clear targets.
Strategic agendas allow “continuous directionality” and complement mission objectives in a context of high
uncertainty and contestation.
In stark contrast with traditional strategies and roadmaps, strategic agendas are directly associated with mission
budgets, co-ordination structures and modes of implementation, increasing their influence on interventions.
Higher level of
political/administrative support
Missions are political by nature, owing to normative goals related to societal impacts.
Broad national missions attract more attention from politicians and high -level administrative levels, which
strengthens their legitimacy but can add pressure to obtain early results.
Broader engagement of
stakeholders
Strategic agendas are developed by a wide range of actors from different communities, increasing their ownership
of the mission and subsequent engagement.
B) Alignment and holistic monitoring of various actors’ plans
Broader horizontal co-
ordination
Almost all net-zero missions subject to a case study have significantly expanded the scope of co-ordination
between different actors across the government structure.
Leadership is assumed by the STI authorities that have launched the mission.
Cross-sectoral co-ordination is the main challenge of net-zero missions, generating significant transaction costs
in the largest and most integrated missions.
Stronger vertical co-ordination
Most net-zero missions are led by national (or EU) authorities; some include local authorities in their
governance.
Local authorities are involved in many mission activities to enable demonstrating solutions and their early
transition to market.
A few net-zero missions are implemented at the regional level, particularly in the context of the new generation
of EU Smart Specialisation Strategies.
Better public-private co-
ordination
Missions complement (and often benefit from) the existing public-private STI concertation platforms. They add a
well-targeted purposive framework and ensure a more direct link to policy interventions.
C) Articulation and management of a portfolio of activities
Broader set of public support
interventions across different
areas
All net-zero missions are bundled under a common strategic and governance framework featuring different types
of interventions, from R&D grants to skill formation or advocacy.
Only a few missions include policy instruments that support the market deployment of current or new solutions.
Net-zero missions allow co-ordinating public support for different aspects of systemic solutions.
Broader set of public support
interventions across the
innovation chain
Several net-zero missions map and connect the various support instruments across the different technology
readiness levels, with a view to providing more continuous support to different stages of the innovation chain.
Novel systemic monitoring and
evaluation approaches
There is a pervasive perception among mission partners that new evaluation methodologies and processes are
needed to evaluate this approach, but very few MOIP evaluations have been undertaken to date, and they do
not significantly depart from traditional STI policy evaluations.

===== PDF_PAGE 170 =====
168 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Develop collective and strategic agendas to address societal challenges
Mission objectives and targets
MOIP objectives can take various forms. In theory and ideally, a mission’s objectives are operationalised
by measurable targets (Mazzucato, 2018[11]). In practice, only around half (46%) of the net -zero missions
identified have set targets. In some cases, targets and objectives can be combined in a “mission statement”
encapsulating in a short – and if possible inspirational – formulation an ambitious result to be attained in a
precise timeframe. These statements serve as “entry points” and “identifiers” to the mission.
The Japanese Moonshot Programme has nine Moonshot g oals covering various societal challenges. For
instance, Moonshot Goal 5 aims for the “creation of industry that enables sustainable global food supply by
exploiting unused biological resources by 2050.”
In the United States, the Hydrogen Earthshot has for malised its main objective as the "1 1 1" goal, i.e. the
objective of “reducing the cost of clean hydrogen by 80% to USD 1 per 1 kilogram in one decade”.
Regardless of the form these objectives take, programme managers claim that their missions set cleare r
and more inclusively developed goals than do the usual programmes and schemes developed by their
organisations. In other words, the goals are formulated to be more impactful (i.e. to “deliver” a result),
rather than simply focusing on inputs or immediate outputs (i.e. to “do” something). As one programme
manager put it, “Usually the goal is to do something, here the goal is to deliver something”. Against this
backdrop, all activities are geared towards the desired outcomes. Even in the most research -intensive
mission, the intended results are the heart of the projects and a cornerstone of research activities. These
clearly enunciated objectives also act as a “focusing device” and a reference point for interactions between
the different actors all along the innovation chain, and across the various involved communities.
Missions set common objectives in uncertain and contested environments
Setting clear objectives at the outset is not limited to adopting “good project management practices”. The
goals – and when they exist, the targets that accompany them – enshrine the results of negotiations on
the objectives. They also reflect hypotheses regarding the evolution of sometimes uncertain variables (e.g.
carbon and energy prices, availability of raw materials, ge opolitics, capacity to overcome scientific and
technological bottlenecks, evolution of users’ perceptions and preferences) that influence these
sociotechnical options, and their even more uncertain results on the state of the world. The mission
therefore appears as a locus of debates, providing a platform for public-private, cross-ministerial and inter-
sectoral negotiations, with direct consequences on public intervention. These debates are essential when
it comes to choosing long-term futures that directly affect people’s well-being. In this light, focusing only on
scientific and technological uncertainties would diminish missions’ social and political complexity, and
underestimate the underpinning power conflicts and disagreements that are important driver s of their
implementation (Wanzenböck et al., 2020 [20]). While modern innovation systems offer many instances
where these negotiations can take place (such as committees, industrial associations and un ions), the
specific added value of missions is that they integrate mission orientation, co -ordination and
implementation in the same institutional space. The mission formalises and renders directly “actionable”
the results of the negotiations. The differen t actors can directly refer to the ensuing actions to strengthen
their positions. And the government can tie its financial commitment to achievement of the mission’s
objectives, in order to defend choices that incorporate certain social values which may no t always be
aligned with the individual interests of companies or other stakeholder groups.
The development of objectives requires significant information and knowledge to strengthen their
underlying hypotheses. However, some missions do not have a dedica ted budget and therefore rely on
the capacity and resources of specific actors, potentially reducing the acceptability of the results regarding
controversial issues. Furthermore, very few missions use formal foresight approaches to support the

===== PDF_PAGE 171 =====
 169
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

formulation of objectives, despite their potential to capture broad sociotechnical issues. 5 In most cases, a
mission’s strategic agenda is defined using technology road-mapping techniques rather than a full-fledged
foresight exercise.6 This reflects, in part, countries’ limited experience of using foresight in policy making.
Moreover, foresight exercises take time, and the missions are often under high political pressure to start
functioning as soon as possible. Another reason for the limited use of foresight is the narrow techno-centric
scope of many net-zero missions.
It took more than a year for the French authorities to develop the “clean hydrogen Acceleration Strategy”. This
time was used to conduct preliminary studies to calibrate and strengthen the legitimacy of the targets; run
extensive consultations to assess needs; and issue calls for expressions of interest to identify potential
solutions and project partners, and negotiate common objectives with them despite a wide diversity of views
and interests. As a result, the mission deliberately includes some strong choices that exclude certain options.
For example, the strategy focuses only on clean hydrogen for applications where battery storage technologies
are ill -suited (hence mainly heavy vehicles), which would b e produced with electrolysers plugged into the
electricity network. The mission objectives also include clear choices regarding the type, capacity and distance
of the electrolysers to the application site.
The mission-oriented strategic agendas and roadmaps act as collective action frameworks
In several cases, the objectives are not the starting point but rather a first result of the mission itself. Many
missions start with broad objectives, priorities or “mission areas”. The first step of the mission is to develop
or refine the objectives, most often embedding them in a strategic agenda or roadmap. The five
EU missions,7 for instance, started with five broad mission areas and a mandate for groups of high -level
specialists in each area (the mission boards) to first devise a strategy featuring objectives and targets (the
mission board reports) and then a plan (the implementation plans). These loose directional elements do
not really aim to set a clear orientation, but rather incentivise and facilitate the form ation of large
partnerships, wherein public and private actors jointly set attainable objectives and develop the collective
strategy to meet them. This is particularly true of ecosystem -based MOIPs, which start with a call for
strategic agendas, followed by the selection and implementation of some of these agendas.
A strategic agenda almost always complements a mission’s initial objectives and targets to ensure the
directionality and consistency of its different activities. These agendas (under different denominations and
formats) are key to the expression of top -down and bottom -up dynamics. While governments still play a
strong role at the political stage of setting the mission’s objectives and targets, it is almost always the
stakeholders who develop the strategic agenda which maps the different pathways towards fulfilling these
objectives. What differentiates these mission -oriented strategic agendas from traditional strategies is that
they are developed, implemented and monitored in an integrated way, allo wing the strategic agenda to
become the authoritative framework for action. In several missions, some components of the strategic
agendas are directly used to develop the call for proposals; they can also be used on a regular basis to
monitor progress on the different activities against the roadmap and identify gaps in the mission.
In the Netherlands, the implementation of the “Carbon-free Built Environment” mission under the Mission-driven
Top Sector and Innovation Policy (MTIP) is guided by four multi-annual mission innovation programmes
(MMIPs) covering different sub -areas. The MMIPs include not only the activities to be performed but also the
map of public financial resources deployed across the entire innovation chain, from fundamental and applied
research to pilots and demonstrators. The call for proposals for the implementation of the mission are directly
based on these MMIPs (some calls include copy -pasted text from the initial mission document). Since all the
25 top sectors’ missions have developed such MMIPs, they are also used to identify and strengthen synergies
among them.
While strategic agendas are never binding and there is no “stick”, peer pressure among the mission
partners in the broad governance bodies can exert a significant influence on possible opportunistic
behaviours by the different partners.

===== PDF_PAGE 172 =====
170 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

An underlying condition for the effectiveness and legitimacy of strategic agendas is that they should be
both directional and flexible. They must be a “living document” t hat evolves regularly to adapt to new
internal and external conditions. In this regard, some missions, such as the Danish Green Carbon Capture
Storage or Utilisation (CCSU) mission or the Japanese Moonshots, have established procedures to revise
their strategic agendas every year.
Missions’ net-zero objectives interact with a broader set of objectives
An analysis of the main rationales for net -zero missions shows that the objective of combating climate
change is always intertwined with other environmental, economics or health amb itions. This analysis is
useful in highlighting how countries frame their arguments for missions, what aspects they showcase as
the most important, and what they believe missions can help them achieve.
All net-zero missions aim by definition to tackle climate change by reducing GHG emissions;60% link their
aims to wider environmental objectives and 54% to economic impacts (e.g. creating jobs). For instance,
Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation’s (CSIRO) mission to end
plastic waste aims to reinvent the way plastic is made, processed and recycled to stop it from entering the
environment. Some missions clearly enshrine the expected economic impacts in their main objectives and
targets. Further, while not always officially e mphasised, strengthening national competitiveness and
creating new jobs always feature among the missions’ rationales.
The German High -Tech Strategy (HTS) 2025, implemented during the 2017 -21 legislative period, aimed to
“Make Germany into the leading supp lier and market for electromobility” by defining and following concrete
missions, particularly the mission to “Develop safe, networked and clean mobility”.
Korea’s mission The Alchemist “Low -cost carbon dioxide (CO 2)-free hydrogen production facilities” ai ms to
“Develop fundamental technologies and processes for mass -producing cost -effective and eco -friendly
hydrogen in order to secure the leading position of Korea in global market in hydrogen car production and
energy production”.
The first of the six objectives of the French acceleration strategy for industry decarbonisation is to “Ensure the
emergence of a competitive French offer of decarbonisation solutions for industry”.
These diverse objectives primarily reflect the multidimensional and systemic nature of societal challenges.
They are also related to the mission process itself. To engage a wider range of policy sectors, the initial
mission champions have to negotiate the mission objectives, and take onboard new goals and targets.
One of the main intrin sic trade -offs of missions is this balancing between ensuring a broad range of
partners on one side, and directionality and consistency on the other. Ensuring the effective participation
of sectoral ministries and agencies in the mission – not only in terms of time and attention in meetings, but
also of financial and technical assistance – requires it to include objectives that are consistent with their
mandate. The resulting bargaining between different policy sectors creates a risk of diluting the mission .
A diversity of challenges is also the norm at the level of MOIP initiatives, with around three -quarters of
MOIP initiatives combining net-zero missions with missions related to other societal challenges (most often
related to health, but also to food sec urity and ageing). The high prevalence of such diversified multi -
mission initiatives suggests that policy dynamics – i.e. the desire to explore a new type of policy approach
– have a strong influence on the adoption of this policy approach, together with t he imperative of tackling
climate change and other societal challenges. This is related to the fact that STI authorities – which have
a functional, rather than sectoral or thematic, mandate – lead almost all MOIPs.

===== PDF_PAGE 173 =====
 171
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Align and monitor various actors’ plans
Missions gather a broad range of policy sectors around common objectives
It is now well-accepted that complex societal challenges, such as GHG emissions reduction, require broad
cross-sectoral co-ordination, a fact that underpins the rationales for adoptin g a mission -oriented policy
approach. Policy fragmentation greatly hinders the capacity of innovation systems to respond adequately
to wicked societal challenges, such as those included in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(OECD, 2019[21]).
Almost all net-zero missions represent a significantly expanded scope of co -ordination between different
public policy actors. These missions gather around the table not only the public authorities in charge of
research and business innovation, but also some relevant sectoral ministries and agencies. This co -
ordination takes place primarily in dedicated governance bodies with various advisory, decision-making or
monitoring roles. In the larger mission-oriented policy initiatives, these groups can be replicated at different
levels (political, strategic and operational).8
The EU Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities mission (Cities Mission) is led by two high -level managers from the
Directorate-General for Environment and the Directorate-General for Research and Innovation. Besides the
leadership, several groups and committees – notably the “mission owners groups” at working and director
levels – co-ordinate actions between the 12 directorates more or less directly involved in the mission. This is
said to have significantly reduced the number of overlaps between different directorates’ activities related to
cities. The mission’s mode of governance is new, as climate neutrality has traditionally been addressed by
different parts of the European Commission (transport, energy, urban planning, etc.). The “EU Cities” mission
provides a legitimate authority at the systemic level (a “climate neutrality interlocutor”). The mission also
supports cross-sectoral co-ordination aspects within each of the selected 100 cities, which are asked to develop
and sign a “Climate City Contract” (CCC) between the different city partners. These contracts include an overall
net-zero transition plan across all sectors (energy, buildings, waste management and transport), together with
related investment plans. This holistic co -ordination is an essential component of the common guidelines and
requirements that cities must follow in developing these contracts. The CCCs embed and officialise the
systemic dimension for each city participating in the mission.
STI public authorities champion all net-zero missions
STI public authorities in charge of research or business innovation policy have initiated all 30 MOIP
initiatives that include net-zero missions. They are undoubtedly “champions” of mission -oriented policies,
experimenting and arguing for this new policy approach to tackle societal challenges featuring an
unprecedented level of urgency and complexity.
In-depth fieldwork for 20 of those net -zero missions sh ows that almost all have provided an institutional
space and concrete platform for cross -ministerial co-ordination. However, STI public authorities lead the
missions, finance them and provide the bulk of policy instruments to implement them. Sectoral minis tries
and public agencies are “at the mission table”, which allows more informed and holistic decisions. To date,
however, they have barely committed their own financial resources t o the collective endeavour . In other
words, while the co-ordination of net-zero missions is broad and extends beyond the public authorities in
charge of research and innovation, the missions’ budgets remain largely confined to “STI funds”.
Cross-sectoral co-ordination faces many costs and challenges
The OECD study shows that cros s-sectoral co -ordination is not only one of the main expected added
values of MOIPs, but also one of the main practical challenges. This is confirmed by a recent survey of
mission practitioners and stakeholders, who rank “silo effects” as the highest risk for a mission’s success
(OECD and DDC, 2022 [22]). This is not new: holistic co -ordination has been acknowledged as a key
weakness of national innovation systems, as highlighted in all OECD Reviews of I nnovation Policy and

===== PDF_PAGE 174 =====
172 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

confirmed by other types of STI policy assessment at the thematic, regional or initiative levels. Almost all
point to the core issue of co -ordination between public authorities in charge of research and those
responsible for business innovation. However, the upswing in societal challenges (such as global warming)
has broadened the scope of co -ordination to include other sectoral policy and regulatory administrations
with closely related mandates (the “challenge owners”). While mission-oriented policy is seen as a possible
response to this new imperative, in many countries, it occurs in a context where previous challenges related
to the functioning of the innovation system and economic growth remain unresolved.
When fully applied to broa d missions, the governance of the mission involves a number of meetings and
numerous items that must be collectively decided by a wide set of actors. It is therefore necessary to strike
a “sustainable” balance between the benefits of co -ordination on the o ne hand, and transaction costs on
the other. While net-zero missions are almost all very recent, some have already started to readjust this
balance. In the Netherlands, the MTIP has been praised for its very comprehensive governance structure,
which allows co-ordinating a wide range of actors across 2 main axes (with 9 top sectors and 25 missions)
at different levels (high-level/political and operational) in several governance bodies (e.g. mission teams,
top sector teams, programme advisory groups to suppor t MMIPs and transversal teams across several
missions) (Janssen, 2020[23]). However, several actors involved in this policy have pointed to a growing
“mission fatigue” owing to the high number of meetings of these bodies. The policy is now being reformed
to simplify this governance structure and increase its efficiency.
As is traditionally the case in cross -sectoral co-ordination, bringing a large set of actors to the negotiation
table is only the firs t challenge. A second challenge is for each representative in mission governance
bodies – especially those in “non -core”, often sectoral, departments – to engage colleagues in mission
activities, share information and possibly commit funding. The mission competes for time and resources in
administrations that would not normally be involved in such activities as they are not traditionally
considered central to their sectoral mandate. Some of these actors, who act not only as contact points but
also as “ambassadors” for the mission within their administration, struggle to engage the leaders of related
programmes and activities in the mission, and convince them to commit resources.
Delivery and management of a portfolio of activities
Different types of public support interventions need to be integrated to fulfil the mission
As outlined in the OECD definition of MOIPs, missions involve a package of policy and regulatory measures
(Larrue, 2021[14]). In almost all cases, missions do not create new instruments, but integrate existing ones
in a coherent bundle to meet their objectives.
It is widely acknowledged that the societal transformation that conditions the achievement of net -zero will
require a combination of different ty pes of interventions for any given sociotechnical option (D’Arcangelo
et al., 2022 [24]). The different interventions can be categorised under six different types, as shown in
Figure 5.5.

===== PDF_PAGE 175 =====
 173
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 5.5. Different types of public interventions to support the transition towards a net-zero
society

Although net-zero missions vary greatly in terms of scale and scope, they always combine several of these
intervention types under a common strategic and governance framework. Grants for research and
innovation activities remain one of the main policy instruments for channelling mission funding to projec t
partners. They are, however, accompanied by a wealth of other measures designed to support (among
others) specific projects, competence or excellence centres, regulatory reforms, competitions and prizes,
demonstration sites, training or communication, an d awareness -raising activities. For example, the
UK industry decarbonisation missions dedicate specific actions to skill strengthening. The Danish
CCSU mission performs studies to better understand and shape public acceptance of these technologies.
Several missions, such as the Finnish Growth Engine “Green E2”, support the emergence of new
ecosystems around the mission, which constitute “interest groups” that help promote the necessary
regulatory reforms.
An important rationale for integrating complementary instruments is to provide continuous support across
the different stages of the innovation chain, from R&D to market deployment. Pilot-E in Norway is one such
initiative where the three agencies in charge of research and research-based innovation (Research Council
of Norway), innovation and demonstration (Innovation Norway), and early -market deployment of energy
technologies (Enova) have teamed up to provide a one-stop-shop for sustainable energy projects, such as
green ships (Larrue, 2021[15]).
Although they integrate a wider set of policy instruments, very few missions currently include instruments
to support mass deployment of the newly developed solutions. The French clean hydrogen acceleration
strategy, for instan ce, compensates early adopters for the higher price of clean hydrogen. This allow
managing and monitoring within a common strategic framework the balance to be struck, and the
complementarities to be exploited, between research for new solutions and market introduction of available
ones.
Levels of integration vary significantly among missions
An important distinction between missions is not only the range of these instruments but their level of
integration, i.e. the extent to which decisions regarding their implementation follow the commonly
developed strategic agenda and are collectively monitored. Some missions can be loosely integrated in

===== PDF_PAGE 176 =====
174 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

this respect, with the mission acting as a common heading for all relevant activities falling under its remit.
This was the case for the missions of the former German “Hightech” strategies (2009 -21), which were
categorised as “umbrella missions” by (Wittmann et al., 2021[25]).
MOIPs are generally less integrated at t he implementation level than at the orientation and co -ordination
levels. In many cases, the funding and implementation of activities belong to specific agencies, which use
their own portfolio of instruments in keeping with the orientations and guidance de cided at a higher
governance level.
What are the outcomes of MOIPs?
MOIPs are expected to build upon their three main outputs discussed above (i.e. strategic agenda,
governance structure and policy package) to essentially “aim higher”, benefit from more re sources and
engagement from all partners, and explore more systemic solutions. The extent to which net-zero missions
contribute to these three outcomes is assessed in this section and synthetised in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3. Synthesis of the main outcomes of net-zero missions
Outcomes
Net-zero mission effects Main results
A) Broader scope and level of ambitions in missions
Broader set of potential
solutions considered
The scope of the mission is a matter of important debate to strike a balance between the benefits of ‘open’
missions (characterised by neutrality and exploration) and more narrowly defined missions (characterised by
directionality and integration between different mission activities).
Few missions are open, and some are evolving towards more narrowly defined and directional missions.
More ambitious and long-term
objectives
Most missions have set objectives geared towards impacts in 2030 and 2050.
The differences in different missions’ levels of ambition are difficult to assess.
B) Greater resources and higher engagement in net-zero missions
Higher and longer-term
funding
Missions generally benefit from longer-term funding compared to traditional research and innovation schemes.
Funding is only informally earmarked for missions in the long run, but public funding announcements tend to
generate some pressure for public authorities to commit the promised resources.
Net-zero mission budgets mainly originate from STI public authorities. Few sectoral public authorities have
committed additional funding to achieve the missions.
There is limited financial innovation in leveraging public funding to attract private funding (through blended
finance, equity funding, etc.)
Stronger buy-in and
commitment of private actors
and stakeholders
There is strong engagement of stakeholders in developing the strategic agenda.
Insufficient information on private-sector financial contributions to conclude on mission leverage effect.
C) More systemic innovation in net-zero mission
Better integration of the
demand and impact
dimensions
Connection to needs and demands is one of the aspects most frequently raised as a novelty of net-zero
missions.
Net-zero missions provide various means to articulate demands at different stages of the mission life cycle, from
mission definition to mission evaluation.
More comprehensive and
consistent range of activities
Net-zero missions allow a wider and more consistent range of activities, from basic research to deployment,
capacity-building, communication and advocacy.
Proactive portfolio management practices in missions are necessary to reap the systemic benefits of missions
but require significant resources, new skills, and new rules and procedures in ministries and agencies.

===== PDF_PAGE 177 =====
 175
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Broader scope and level of ambitions in missions
There exists a need to strike the right balance of openness
The scope of a mission is one of the most difficult factors to comprehend conceptually and handle in
practice. One reason for this is the apparent paradox at the core of the mission principle: missions must
be open to all solutions for a given objective, but the framing of the objective itself greatly influ ences the
range of potential solutions. The scope of options greatly varies according to the positioning of the
mission’s objective in the “problem tree”, from a totally open mission (“solving climate change”) to narrower
missions addressing the issue of emissions in certain areas, and even within specific technologies.
In theory, the only specific mission objective that would not restrict the range of potential solutions would
be “to achieve net-zero by 2050”, without any mention of any sector or technology that might hinder actors
from helping to find net -zero solutions within the framework of their own capabilities and experience.
Another rationale for mission openness is that a narrow scope can create doubts about the mission’s
neutrality. When support increasingly targets a more narrowly defined problem, the “level playing field” can
be altered (Boon and Edler, 2018[26]).
In practice, several factors conspire against overly “open” missions:
 Relevance: some strategic narrowing-down of the problem allows a better alignment with national
priorities (themselves related to international commitments), as well as greater coherence with a
country’s research and industry systems. While these criteria could, in theory, be integrated
ex post when selecting the projects, rather than ex ante when specifying the problem, in practice,
this would generate inefficiencies both for the project partners and the policy makers.
 Commensurability: a mission’s objective must be aligned with the available national financial
resources and capabilities. A small innovation system will struggle to pursue a net -zero mission
with the necessary scale and scope to cover several emission sectors (e.g. agriculture, industry
and transpor t). Of course, this does not preclude using more traditional policy instruments to
support innovation in emission reduction in other sectors. In most countries, however, the mission
approach, which involves significant budgets and transaction costs, will n eed to be reserved for
areas where the problem is particularly acute.
 Consistency of the option portfolio: an overly open mission could result in a set of options that are
too dispersed to work synergistically. Reaping the expected benefits of integrated a ctivities within
a mission requires some degree of proximity (either through similarities or complementarities)
between the different options proposed to solve its objectives.
In practice, “open” missions do exist. For example, the “Towards net -zero” mission of CSIRO in Australia
focuses on advancing net -zero technologies to the point of demonstration, without specifying what those
technologies should be. What is particularly interesting is that the earliest open missions have already
learned from their exp erience, and are now evolving towards (or will be replaced by) a less open, more
strategic definition of their objectives. This is notably the case with the Swedish strategic innovation
programmes and “Challenge-driven Innovation” schemes.
Choosing the right scope of missions is, therefore, a matter of striking the right balance. Some pilot “multi-
mission MOIPs” have been experimenting with various scopes.
Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) has debated how to determine the “right” scope for the missions under its
new “Challenge Research” programmes. The agency has deliberately launched missions with varying degrees
of openness to draw lessons on this key issue. The Zero Emission Challenge, for instance, was very open as
it aimed to “Support interdisciplin ary teams to develop disruptive solutions that accelerate progress towards
net-zero greenhouse gas emissions in Ireland by 2050”. It attracted a project to create a carbon -neutral,
resilient dairy farm (“Farm Zero C”, the winning project at the end of the competition), as well as projects on
the recycling of lithium cobalt batteries or new solar panel technologies. Other missions were more narrowly

===== PDF_PAGE 178 =====
176 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

defined, such as the Food Challenge or the Plastics Challenge. Some further specifications allowed fine-tuning
the degree of openness: the Zero Emission Challenge was open to all solutions to reduce GHG emissions, but
a specific “bonus” of EUR 1 million (euros) was announced for projects that would succeed in developing CO2
removal technologies
Another way in which missions manage their degree of openness is through stage-gate funding and other
procedures that take a gradual approach to problem resolution (such as calls for expression of interest). A
mission can start with broad objectives to “test” the potential e cosystems and explore different pathways,
some of which will be selected and expanded at later stages. In these missions, the more systemic aspects
are developed within the projects that make it to the final stage.
Open exploratory research is placed inside or outside missions
The scope of options can vary depending on the types of activities supported within a given mission.
Missions often pursue in parallel different generations of technologies to fulfil staged objectives, often
related to GHG-reduction commitments for different time horizons (2030 and 2050 in most cases) Mission
co-ordinators usually emphasise that they try to remain more open and flexible with regard to the scope of
solutions under investigation for future technologies, as they require more exploratory research.
While such an approach can appear to be in line with the “common wisdom” of research management, it
has implications for the design of the mission. Since the focused and integrated features of the mission -
oriented framework are less suited for exploratory research, then it may be better placed either outside the
mission or in a specific sub -programme with its own operating principles and governance, although still
directed towards mission goals. 9 In both cases, regardless of wheth er exploratory research is positioned
inside or outside the mission, it is essential to set up institutionalised linkages between these upstream
activities and the mission’s “core” development, demonstration and deployment activities. Concretely, this
involves periodical progress reviews of these activities, and subsequent critical decisions as to which
avenues should be terminated, redirected or integrated into the mission plan.
Within the French Acceleration Strategies, exploratory research is conducted i n the Priority Research
Programmes and Equipment (PEPRs) which are attached to one or several acceleration strategies to support
them. PEPRs function as “upstream sub -programmes”, embedded within the acceleration strategies but with
their own operating pri nciples, budget and structure of governance. This provides PEPRs with a significant
level of freedom to investigate new uncertain basic research avenues that could lead to new solutions to the
acceleration strategies’ objectives. The PEPR “Support innovati on to develop new low -carbon industrial
processes”, which is attached to the industry decarbonisation acceleration strategy, covers technology -
readiness levels 1-4 through breakthrough research on (for instance) the storage and valorisation of CO2. The
PEPR has a budget of EUR 70-80 million out of a total budget of EUR 610 million. The results, and the new
information and opportunities originating from the PEPR, are discussed in the context of the mission “Task
Force” (the mission’s operational governance s tructure), and therefore in an inter -ministerial setting. This is
hardly the case in more traditional programmes, where exploratory research is connected to authorities in
charge of R&D, but rarely to other actors located at later stages of the innovation process.
Greater resources and higher engagement in net-zero missions
Missions attract longer-term funding
All missions with formal targets related to GHG reduction targets have set their final mission deadline for
2030 or 2050, in line with their country ’s international CO 2 reduction commitments. While administrative
budgeting processes and political cycles do not allow securing budgets until these deadlines are reached,
the analysis of the missions’ funding horizon shows that they generally benefit from longer-term funding
compared to traditional research and innovation schemes. Among the net -zero missions for which
information is available, a majority (61%) are funded for more than four years on average, with 38% of
these receiving funding for more than six years. For purposes of comparison, OECD analysis of

===== PDF_PAGE 179 =====
 177
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

competitive research-funding schemes shows that the majority of research awards are granted for a period
of three to five years, although there are reports of increasing grant durations in more recent funding
schemes. Financial support awarded for longer durations (seven years or more) is most often directed at
”excellence centres” with lower application numbers or is associated with institutional funding (OECD,
2018[27]). The comparison with EC -OECD STIP Compass data confirms this result: about 45% of public
research grants and 34% of business R&D grants have a funding duration above three years.10
Since most funding organisations (ministries, agencies) are still s ubject to an annual budget cycle, multi -
year funding is most often only announced (or in the best case earmarked), but not appropriated. However,
even if non -binding, they are announced publicly, and therefore usually represent fairly reliable budget
commitments that reduce the level of uncertainty of the partners and stakeholders involved in the mission,
allowing them to plan ahead and set more ambitious and long -term objectives. Missions are too recent to
allow assessing whether they can withstand several budgetary restrictions, such as those experienced
after the 2008 financial crisis. The likely tightening of budgets in coming years, owing to the difficult
economic conditions related to the COVID -19 pandemic and Russia’s war against Ukraine, will be thei r
first robustness test.
Most missions’ budgets remain in the range of large-scale climate R&D programmes, but
are better integrated
Sixty percent of the mission initiatives assessed in the OECD study had budget information available. 11
The most frequent a nnual budget ranges were EUR 1-20 million (23 missions, 50%) and EUR 20-
200 million (12 missions, 26%).
As for other policies, the diversity in mission budgets owes primarily to overall differences in the size and
level of development of country STI budgets. Another important factor in determining budget ranges is the
scope of the mission. Large systemic missions, such as those defined in an overarching mission -oriented
strategic framework, feature a wide number of programmes that are relevant to the mission. This was the
case of the former German H TS mission, “Achieve substantial greenhouse gas neutrality in industry
(‘GGNII’)”, which had an annual budget of EUR 6.25 billion. However, the budget figure alone can be
somewhat misleading in such cases as the mission’s overall budget is the aggregation of different funding
sources, and the influence of these “umbrella programmes” on the different budgets falling under the
mission is unclear.
A mission’s budget envelope correlates with its content. Notably, the few missions that also support the
market d eployment of new solutions generally require far greater budgets than missions focusing on
research. As mentioned earlier, this is the case for France’s “clean hydrogen” and “industry
decarbonisation” acceleration strategies, whose respective budgets of ov er EUR 1 billion per year are
largely allocated to providing price -based incentives for adopting new (more costly) technologies. On the
other end of the spectrum, the Irish “Zero Emissions Challenge” research programme, which aims to
include the demand dimension in its research activities but remains focused on R&D, has an annual budget
of EUR 1.5 million.
Public funding data are not readily available for comparable initiatives, but comparing selected examples
of climate change -related research and innovati on “programmes” provides some meaningful orders of
magnitude.12 This comparison shows that (“non -mission-oriented”) thematic programmes in renewable
energy, CCSU or sustainable transport technologies have budgets in the EUR 5-100 million range, as it is
the case for most missions.
However, here again the comparison should be treated with caution, as some of these programmes might
be closer to the level of MOIP initiatives (which often include several missions) than that of individual
missions. Annual funding levels of whole MOIP initiatives are actually higher, ranging from EUR 11 million

===== PDF_PAGE 180 =====
178 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

for Pilot-E in Norway to over EUR 1 billion for the UK Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund (EUR 1.3 billion)
and the Dutch mission-driven “Topsector” policy (EUR 1.4 billion).13
While the comparisons above are imperfect, they tend to suggest that the funding envelopes available to
net-zero missions, while significant, remain somewhat in the same order of magnitude as more traditional
large climate-related research and innovation programmes.
However, further investigations should also be performed at the level of the projects and activities within
missions. It often happens that the financial support provided for given activities or projects is greater than
what it is in traditional project funding. For instance, more targeted joint action between the three agencies
involved in Norway’s Pilot -E scheme makes it possible to fund a smaller number of large consortia. The
Dutch MTIP is also one of the very few cases where a specific instrument has been specifically created to
complement the mission policy mix. Specifically, the “Mission -oriented research, development and
innovation” scheme supports multidisciplinary consortia that undertake projects combining various
technological and non -technological sub-solutions, including activities related to their commercialisation
and societal acceptance (Janssen, 2020[23]).
Besides funding levels, an important dimension is the nature and composition of mission budgets. Many
missions do not have a dedicated budget and are funded by different funding sources. This is confirmed
by the survey of mission practitioners and stakeholders performed by the OECD Mission Action Lab and
the Danish Design Center (OECD and DDC, 2022 [22]). While the bulk of funding comes from national
actors, most missions receive funding from multiple sources, showing a “scattered image of funding
resources”. Fur thermore, around one -third of respondents consider that “aligning resources across
government or organisations ” is the biggest financial challenge, ahead of the mismatch between
investment and strategic mission objectives, the lack of risk capital and high-risk, high-reward investments,
and the lack of targeted resources .14 This is especially the case for the larger national missions, despite
some notable exceptions.
The budget of the French clean hydrogen acceleration strategy is an order of magnitude hig her than past
funding of hydrogen RD&D, notably due to the support provided to market deployment. The increase is from
around a few hundred million euros in the last 10 years to over one billion euros per year for the acceleration
strategy. Furthermore, du ring the French “Investments for the Future” programmes ( Programmes
d’investissements d’avenir [PIA]) 1 to 3 (from 2010 to 2020), the budgets used to be integrated by sectors of
intervention (e.g. higher education, business innovation, technology transfer) and/or broad sectors (transport,
energy). With the adoption of the “acceleration strategies” in the PIA4, the budgets now target each strategy,
covering different industries and stages of the innovation chain. This makes it easier to co -ordinate the plans
of different actors, mobilising and staging various actions or sectors as required, in accordance with the
progress made.
Contrary to what might be expected from experimental and ambitious initiatives, missions have not been
supported by financial innovat ion. To a large extent, funding sources remain traditional, without recourse
to equity funding, blended finance or other types of public -private financial partnerships. Innovative public
procurement is also seldom used, despite some early prototypes. Attra cting funding at the right scale to
additionally support the mass deployment of novel solutions will require finding new ways to fund missions
at a time when public budgets are under pressure.
The leverage effect of missions will be essential to determine their success
Uncertainty around the unfolding of net-zero pathways, and consequently the development of the mission
strategic agenda or roadmap as a “living document” in many missions, requires some degree of financial
flexibility. Firm long -term financial commitments from public authorities must be in place, while still
preserving a significant margin for changes to adapt to new internal and external developments. However,
this can prove difficult due to existing rigid public budgetary and account ing rules. One workaround is to
commit a portion of the announced funding and earmark another portion to be awarded under certain

===== PDF_PAGE 181 =====
 179
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

conditions, notably the ability to form a wide and solid partnership that gathers the necessary capabilities
and resources to meet the mission objectives. A more common solution is to use a gated funding model,
where projects must achieve pre -determined assessment milestones to progress to the next phase and
receive the associated instalment.
In the Danish CCSU Innomission, 40% o f the budget is not included at the start (compared to 10% usually),
but rather earmarked for allocation to the selected partnership over five years. The main condition for the
allocation of this funding is the proven ability of the partnership to attract new relevant activities and partners.
To do this, the partnership may need to face administrative and legal issues.
Mission funding should therefore be considered from a dynamic perspective. Ultimately, a mission’s
success depends on the funding it is abl e to attract, using the governance and policy frameworks it has
built with its initial budget: some mission managers view the initial budget of their missions, in almost all
cases originating from the leading STI authorities, as “seed money”. Given the transformational objectives
of net-zero missions, the finance needed to scale up the sociotechnical solutions that have been developed
are vastly higher than their endowment at the outset. Some missions have invested in developing a “map”
of potential funding sources that could be mobilised as the mission’s strategic agenda unfolds. To date,
however, few missions have been able to secure significant financial commitments beyond the initial STI
funding. The EU “Climate -neutral and smart cities” mission has set up an innovative procedure to label
cities that comply with some criteria established collectively in order to ease their access to complementary
funding.
The initial EU Cities mission budget (EUR 360 million over 2021-23) originates only from Horizon Eur ope. To
date, no other directorates have committed or even earmarked funds for the mission. This initial budget is
mainly dedicated to setting up the overall framework for developing and normalising the process to be followed
by the 100 participating cities to become “smart and climate-neutral”, and supporting the cities in implementing
this process through the Mission Platform. The platform provides participating cities with the necessary
expertise and assistance for developing and implementing their CCCs, as well as financial and technical
advisory services to develop a tailor -made investment plan to access public and private funding. A key
component of the mission’s leverage effect consists in awarding a “Mission label” to selected cities that have
signed a CCC. This label aims to “unlock synergies with other programmes” by facilitating the creation of
targeted funding opportunities in other EU funding programmes (not least the European Investment Bank and
the European Regional Development Fund). Cities ar e invited to refer explicitly to their mission label in their
award procedures (calls for proposals, prizes, etc.). It is also expected that in the second phase of the mission
starting in 2023, when the vast majority of CCCs are in place, linkages will be established to calls for proposals
under other EU funding programmes. Labelled cities could receive privileged access to some relevant EU calls
or additional “points” in the award criteria under these calls’ evaluation process. The Council of the
European Union, in its “Conclusions on European missions” adopted in June 2022, proposed that this labelling
procedure be used for other EU missions in the context of calls for proposal outside Horizon Europe, in order
“to facilitate the construction of mission s’ portfolios, to increase the visibility of the related initiatives and to
gather their results” (Council of the European Union, 2022[28]).
More systemic innovation in net-zero missions
Needs and demands are articulated throughout the mission’s life cycle
Although different types of STI policies have made progress in the way they identify the needs and
demands to be addressed, and how they use these to calibrate their objectives and design, the demand
conditions are still not given full consideration when designing the policies to support missions (Boon and
Edler, 2018[26]). The systematic review of net -zero missions in this chapter draws a less neg ative picture
of missions. It finds that in many cases, the missions tend to be effective platforms for demand articulation
in the specific context of systemic and complex societal challenges.

===== PDF_PAGE 182 =====
180 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The mission’s demand-driven nature is one of the aspects most frequently highlighted as a novelty of the
mission-oriented policy approach. There exist various means to articulate demands in missions at different
stages of their life cycle, from mission definition to mission evaluation (Figure 5.6).
Figure 5.6. Integration of the demand dimension in net-zero missions at different stages of the
mission lifecycle

During their early stages of definition, missions use different ways (e.g. consultation workshops and
platforms, committees and studies) to determine and integrate the interests of society and various
stakeholders’ views.15 Through these various channels, the demand and use dimensi ons are embedded
by design in mission objectives and targets. While the mission targets can be sometimes politically driven
(as for the 25 missions of the Dutch MTIP), in many missions, the development of the strategic agendas
is the main channel for integrating the demand and use dimensions. This is especially true for ecosystem-
based MOIPs. In these initiatives, large communities of actors coalesce to develop an agenda that is
consensual enough to reconcile the interests of the broadest part of the ecosystem, and ambitious enough
to maximise the chances to be selected by public authorities for implementation.
The governance of the mission can also serve as a channel to connect more continuously to the potential
user community and various interest parties. Although these co -ordination structures most often involve
representatives from various public authorities, the presence of sectoral ministries or agencies can help
integrate the use dimension in missions. Again, ecosystem -based MOIPs are an exception, as their
governance structure features large representation from the ecosystem itself. Some of the largest
overarching mission schemes can also have a dedicated advisory body, comprising stakeholders and
experts with strong consultation mandates.
During the course of implementation, some missions – even the most research-intensive – have integrated
policy support into the upstream and downstream stages of the innovation chain at the project level.
In the Irish net -zero mission (“Challenge Research” programme ), project applicants are strongly encouraged
to include users in the proposal. While this is not compulsory, it is clearly recommended. Even during the so -
called “seed phase” (first phase in the programme’s stage -gate funding), SFI promotes interactions b etween
the “challenge teams” and potential “solution beneficiaries” so that they can test whether their ambitions are
realistic, and also navigate non -technical issues relating to challenges (e.g. stakeholder engagement) and
solutions (e.g. barrier identification). A “societal impact champion” is nominated for each project, to provide a
strong societal perspective for team members as they develop their solution, and build relationships between
scientific researchers and their stakeholders and beneficiaries.

===== PDF_PAGE 183 =====
 181
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

In addition, SFI strives to identify and map the “impact actors” related (in a broad sense) to the various
applications and use of the technologies being developed, and support connections between the researchers
involved in the mission and these organisa tions. SFI strongly encourages the mission teams to engage with
these actors so that they better understand the challenges and start building connections. This has a significant
acceleration effect, bringing projects closer to the market and impact. SFI al so organises “meet and greet”
events with investors, to familiarise researchers with their way of thinking.
Missions support a more comprehensive and consistent range of activities
Depending on a mission’s objectives, its tailor -made policy mix supports a wide range of activities, from
basic research to deployment, capacity-building, communication and advocacy. However, the added value
of the mission approach does not only reside in the diversity of activities it covers, as more traditional
initiatives like large-scale programmes or clusters may also cover a wide spectrum of activities. Rather,
the mission enables greater consistency in the pool of projects geared towards achieving its objectives
and often guided by a specific strategic agenda.
The Atmosp here and Climate Competence Centre (ACCC) is a Finnish flagship programme that aims to
mitigate climate change by increasing forest and soil carbon sequestration, and improve global air quality. The
ACCC consortium brings together three universities and one research institute, and over 40 key stakeholders.
The mission sustains a diverse array of activities, which run the gamut from education, research and impact
programmes, to engagement and citizen science, and solution development and prototyping. Among t hese
activities, the Verified Climate Safety initiative verifies climate neutrality based on observation systems; the
GlobalSMEAR initiative integrates 1 000 atmospheric -earth system stations to provide data from various
ecosystems around the world; the Ci tizen Science Initiative allows the general public to contribute to problem
definition, data collection and analysis in climate science; the Initiative for “Safer Climate” works at the
intersection between civil society, academia and art; the Climate Unive rsity develops climate change and
sustainability education in higher education; and ACCC Impact Week promotes dialogue between earth system
scientists and society stakeholders interested in the co-creation of science-based solutions for climate change
and air quality.
Most (if not all) net -zero missions illustrate the additionality of the mission approach, compared to
traditionally more fragmented policies, when it comes to designing and directing a consistent pool of
activities towards a shared goal. It i s therefore worth delving further into the subject and attempting to
debunk this notion of portfolio consistency and determine what type of complementarities are expected in
the various missions. Figure 5.7 provides such an analysis, using an ad hoc typology of the announced
rationales for integrating activities within missions.

===== PDF_PAGE 184 =====
182 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 5.7. Breakdown of net-zero MOIP initiatives and missions by scope of integration
In percentage of MOIP initiatives and missions

Note: MOIP initiatives are the overarching MOIP frameworks that “host” the missions. For instance, the Dutch “Mission -driven Topsectors ”
programme has 25 missions, while the United States Department of Energy has launched 6 Energy Earthshots.
Source: Authors' own calculations based on authors’ desk reviews.
StatLink 2 https://stat.link/idze6x
First, around 40% of the missions included in the OECD study also target demonstration and market
deployment phases. This shows that the net -zero missions’ scope extends beyond R&D and seeks to
better bridge the demonstration or scale -up stages, ensuring continuity. Second, almost 30% of missions
aspire to connect together different segments of the value chain. Third, the most frequent type of integration
in net-zero missions is “holistic integration” (28%). As already noted, missions introduce in a systemic way
various forms of activities into their remit by including social, legal, behavioural and educational aspects.
Some net -zero missions add new formal criteria to traditional criteria for selecting activities (e.g. team
excellence, relevance and experience) in order to capture each project’s expected contribution to the
mission’s objectives. However, this new approach is still in its infancy, and there are few precise
comparative studies on the different ways of assessing the “fitness” of a mission portfolio within a given
project.
The four EU missions – all of which aim directly or indirectly to reduce GHGs – represent a step change in the
way the projects are selected in framework programmes. As stipulated in the Horizon Europe Implementation
Strategy (European Commission, 2020 [29]), mission evaluation modalities will be designed to ensure the
selection of a coherent portfolio of projects. The plan is to proceed via two -stage calls, first, by evaluating the
intrinsic quality of each individual proposal submitted and second, by identifying high -quality proposals that
work together to maximise the expected impact of the portfolio as a whole. The evaluation committees will have
more flexibility to adapt to a mission-oriented approach. For instance, Article 26 of the Programme regulation
stipulates that the “evaluation committee may rank the proposals having passed the applicable thresholds
according to their contribution to the achievement of specific policy objectives, and may also propose any
substantial adjustments to the proposals in as far as needed for the consistency of the portfolio”. Actions are
also encouraged before a call (e.g. using an expression of interest mechanism) to support the building of a
consistent portfolio. Another novelty is the tailor -made approach for selecting projects, which will vary from
mission to mission to take into account each mission’s inherent characteristics.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Integration of option portfolio
Integration of policy mix
Integration of infrastructural projects/activities
Cross-sectoral integration
Integration of ecosystem
Interdisciplinarity
Integration of innovation chain
Holistic integration
Integration of value chain
Integration of demonstration/scale-up projects
Missions Initiatives

===== PDF_PAGE 185 =====
 183
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Missions encourage hands-on portfolio management
The implementation of such portfolio approaches calls for a change in established practices, not only to
select projects according to mission objectives and strategic agendas, but also to manage the projects and
complementary activities more proactively and strategical ly. These so -called “portfolio management
practices” originate from large -scale projects in the public and private sectors (notably in defence and
aeronautics), and entered the realm of STI public policies through the DARPA agency and, later on,
DARPA-like agencies (Wallace and Rafols, 2015[30]). As documented by a voluminous literature, portfolio
management in these agencies is greatly predicated not only on the rare combinations of competencies
among the programme staff, but also on the conditions offered to them within their agencies (notably in
terms of support resources, empowerment and autonomy) to allow them to perform active project
management (Azoulay et al., 2018[31]).
Many MOIP initiatives adopt such proactive and hands -on portfolio management practices and engage in
frequent interactions with mission partners, including during the calls for proposals. This is less the case
of the ecosystem-based MOIPs, whose success depends more on co-operation among the wide range of
ecosystem partners in the framework of a co -developed strategic agenda than on the competencies and
prerogatives of a key individual co-ordinating their actions. In these missions, such as the Finnish Growth
Engine “Green E2”, significant funding (sometimes the whole budget) is dedicated to supporting the
formation and structuring of the ecosystem partnership, and providing resources for its “orchestration”.
Similarly, the “Sw edish Innovation Platform for Textile Sorting” also dedicates one stage (Stage 2) of a
three-step stage-gate funding process to stakeholder collaboration.
While it is difficult to quantify, several mission managers emphasised that proactive portfolio management
calls for significantly greater resources than traditional practices. They also mentioned that these practices
are often hindered (or in some cases made impossible) by organisational procedures – and in Europe, by
R&D state aid rules that require a fair treatment of project applicants to ensure a level playing field among
potential beneficiaries.
Conclusions
Applying a theory of change, this chapter has provided the first comprehensive analysis of the additionality
of MOIPs in helping countries meet their GHG emission-reduction pledges, building on a purpose -built
database and in-depth case studies of net -zero missions. Although further work is needed to finalise the
analysis of this rich material, the chapter has identified key strengths and weaknesses, and possible future
evolutions of net-zero missions.
Most net-zero missions produce many of their expected results. In most cases, they represent a marked
improvement over traditional STI policy mixes. They allow different mixes of – and a stronger focus on –
common objectives and strategic agendas, broader co -ordination of policy plans across administrative
silos and higher integration of various support instruments across the different stages of the innovation
chain. However, these improvements will not be sufficient to scale up and deploy these innovations on a
massive scale. Net -zero missions focus on technological innovation. In essence, they remain led by
STI authorities, relying almost exclusively on STI policy interventions and budgets. While s ectoral policy
and regulatory authorities have a hand in the mission structure of governance, and can share information
– and to some extent, influence – decisions, they have not yet contributed their own resources and
programmes to the mission. To bring about the transformative changes needed to achieve the goal of net-
zero (as opposed to simply reducing overlaps and speeding up technological innovation), net -zero
missions will require investments of a far greater scale and scope. They will also need to ba lance, align
and accompany the mass deployment of these innovations with solutions to promote social and
behavioural changes, which is prerequisite for reducing GHG emissions rapidly and significantly.

===== PDF_PAGE 186 =====
184 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The success of net -zero missions will depend on their ability to expand beyond STI programmes and
budgets (the “STI -only trap”) and move from co -developed strategic agendas to joined -up action (the
“orientation trap”). Encouragingly, recent existing experimental and pilot mission initiatives with significant
reflexive activities have already generated important learning, and are starting to move away from these
traps.
The MOIP “STI-only trap”
Net-zero missions are broader in scale and scope that traditional programmes, but remain focused on
more or less narro wly defined “technological innovation”. While mission managers often claim that social
innovation is as important as technological innovation in their mission – and far more prominent than in
other STI initiatives – the social components are mainly limited to advocacy, information and
communication campaigns, as well as various studies at the individual and societal levels to prepare
technology scale-up and market transition. Given the importance of combining both types of innovation,
the transformative potential of these missions remains unclear. This is consistent with other studies, such
as the study on the missions of the former German HTS 2025 during the 2017-21 legislative period, which
showed that stakeholder involvement remained limited in the missio n formulation process to traditional
research and innovation actors, thus not fully realising its transformative potential (Roth et al., 2022[32]).
Even in the broader and most ambitious missions, a c loser scrutiny of leadership and financial
commitments shows that in practice, they are also funded strictly with “STI money” and pertain to
programmes with an STI mandate. For instance, the EU “Soil” mission plans to focus its actions on specific
communities, including land managers, citizens, consumers and companies (European Commission,
2021[33]). Stakeholders need to be mobilised far beyond the scope of STI, which raises the question of
whether the Horizon Europe research and innovation framework programme is the best location to “host”
such ambitious objectives. At the EU level as well as in countries, the funding of activities “beyond STI but
with STI money” has already generated some concerns among researchers who usually benefit from these
programmes.
These observations raise the question of where missions aiming to transform sociotechnical systems to
achieve net-zero should be anchored in government structures. The three main options are STI public
authorities (research and/or innovation), “challenge owners” (sectoral authorities) or centre-of-government
(president, prime minister or cabinet offices). Although this does not apply to all national institutional
settings, positioning the MOIP leadership “above ministries” seems relevant, to raise their level of ambition
and broaden their systemic scope beyond STI authorities. This option is also more compatible with
integrated multi -year budgets originating from different sources (including centra lised budgets and
“common pots”) across policy fields. It is also important to strengthen high-level political buy-in and citizen
ownership of ambitious net-zero missions. A few countries with longer experience of this policy approach
– such as Sweden, where missions lie within the research and innovation agencies – have tried to “elevate”
missions to a higher and broader level of governance, although with mixed results. The French missions
(the acceleration strategies), which are led by an autonomous agenc y attached to the prime minister’s
office, with strong support from the president and a dedicated budget covering a broad systemic portfolio
of actions over different generations of sociotechnical solutions, offer a different model of institutionalised
missions. Countries have not yet been sufficiently innovative in institutionalising missions. Novel options
to steer, govern and possibly manage large systemic missions still need to be designed and experimented
on different levels across government structure s. Options include a dedicated agency linked to several
ministries, a large public -private partnerships/platform or an autonomous organisation with foundation
status.

===== PDF_PAGE 187 =====
 185
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

The MOIP “orientation trap”
Most missions have been successful at setting legitimate and powerful objectives and targets, as well as
a widely shared systemic strategic agenda to fulfil their objectives. Each mission has set up dedicated
holistic governance structures, under which a range of policy makers from different sectors align their plans
and monitor their actions against the mission’s strategic agenda. However, whether the strategic agenda
actually influences collective decision-making on budget allocation and policy implementation is less clear.
In ecosystem -based missions, which are less directional and empower partners to define their own
agendas, a significant share of resources are dedicated to forming the ecosystem and various partnerships
by supporting networking, co -ordination and orchestration. Nevertheless, the large financial resources
necessary for R&D, and especially scale -up and market take -up, are provided through traditional
instruments that sometimes fall outside the sphere of the mission’s holistic decision-making and influence.
In the large national missions, the link to implementation can also be lessened, due to loose co-ordination
in expansive and diluted “umbrella” missions.
Beyond the issue of missions’ influence on public policies, their implementation will depend on their ability
to mobilise the private sector, which will need to provide huge resources to fund and engage as a key
change agent in sustainability transitions. While policy makers and analysts in this phase still focus on
public funding and cr oss-ministerial co-ordination, the ultimate test of missions will be whether they can
garner contributions and financial commitments from private businesses and investors. Thus, missions
also need to innovate in the way they are funded. Innovative financial models for missions, including public-
private partnerships, blended finance options and equity financing, should be investigated and tested to
increase and broaden the scope of funding. These new financial models would be combined with new
targeted policy instruments and comprehensive funds for solution scale-up and market deployment.
Learning by mission orientation
MOIPs are still in their infancy and limited in number. Among the MOIPs that have been identified in the
climate change area, an overwhelming majority were launched between 2018 and 2020. Furthermore,
‘early’ MOIPs, which were developed even before the policy concept itself gained salience, are not only
less numerous but also more remote from the ‘ideal’ MOIP type.
These often experimental and pilot initiatives with significant reflexive activities have already generated
important learning, and continue to evolve. In Germany, the missions of the former HTS 2025, which were
criticised for their weak directionality and loose co-ordination, will be followed by the ‘Future research and
innovation strategy’. This new strategy will feature dedicated governance structures which will materialise
the mission -specific goals, establish milestones and assess their achievement through continuous
monitoring, as requested by the advisory High-Tech Forum prior to its dissolution. In Austria, the mission-
oriented thematic programmes “Building of tomorrow”, “Mobility of the Future” and “City of Tomorrow” will
be taken over by (or embedded within) four national dire ctional and cross-ministerial missions. In Ireland,
the SFI Challenge Research programmes will benefit from the funding and institutional dynamics of the
Irish Recovery and Resilience Plan, expanding and “deepening” their mission-oriented approach within the
newly created “National Challenge Fund”. The latter will be characterised by greater directionality to allow
a more consistent and interrelated project portfolio. The Dutch mission-driven “Top Sector” policy will also
be improved to render it more strategic and efficient.
These are only a few initiatives, and more work remains to be done to make missions “fit” to support the
transition to net-zero. This process will require significant monitoring and evaluation frameworks to develop
adequate methodologies and processes that can not only assess their results, but also capture the added
value and weaknesses of their mission-oriented features.
Transitioning missions to their next stage in order to escape the “STI -only” and “orientation” traps
mentioned above will also depend on making changes to their underpinning environment. Missions often

===== PDF_PAGE 188 =====
186 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

“stall” not because they are ill -designed, but because they come up against ministries’ and agencies’
mandates, administrative and legal rules, accounting structures and governance models that cannot easily
adapt to the mission approach (Aagaard, Norn and Stage, 2022 [34]). Changes at this level are far beyond
the reach of STI authorities alone, and will require signi ficant political support and active engagement.
There is also a need to make relevant changes within the public administrations themselves, such as
adapting incentive structures, procedural rules and practices (e.g. rules governing calls for proposal,
selection criteria, project management and reporting) to the requirements of missions, and strengthening
the relevant resources and skills (e.g. portfolio management).
Finally, future evaluations of MOIPs related to climate change (and other areas) should inve stigate and
incorporate the system -level benefits provided by missions. Some of the new practices and mindsets
generated by the adoption of a mission -oriented policy approach have structural effects at a higher level.
In Norway, for instance, the positive experience of cross-agency co-operation in Pilot-E and other ”Pilot X”
schemes has paved the way for two types of initiatives. First, the revised STI national strategic framework
now includes two new high -level and systemic missions (Larrue and Santos, 2022 [35]). Second, the four
main agencies involved in supporting research and innovation activities have reached a broader co -
operative agreement.

===== PDF_PAGE 189 =====
 187
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

References

Aagaard, K., M. Norn and A. Stage (2022), “How mission-driven policies challenge traditional
research funding systems”, F1000Research, Vol. 11, p. 949,
https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.123367.1.
[34]
Azoulay, P. et al. (2018), Age and High-Growth Entrepreneurship, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA, https://doi.org/10.3386/w24489.
[31]
Boon, W. and J. Edler (2018), “Demand, challenges, and innovation. Making sense of new
trends in innovation policy”, Science and Public Policy, Vol. 45/4, pp. 435-447,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scy014.
[26]
Channell, D. (1999), “Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation”,
Technology and Culture, Vol. 40/2, pp. 390-392, https://doi.org/10.1353/tech.1999.0093.
[38]
Church, C. and M. Rogers (2006), Designing for Results: Integrating Monitoring and Evaluation
in Conflict Transformation Programs, Search for Common Ground,
https://www.sfcg.org/Documents/manualpart1.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[18]
Council of the European Union (2022), Council conclusions on European Missions,
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/56954/st10124-en22.pdf (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[28]
Criscuolo, C., A. Dechezleprêtre and M. Cervantes (2023), “Driving low-carbon innovations for
climate neutrality”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 143, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/8e6ae16b-en.
[4]
Criscuolo, C., A. Dechezleprêtre and M. Cervantes (2022), Driving low-carbon innovations for
climate neutrality, https://doi.org/10.1787/8e6ae16b-en.
[7]
D’Arcangelo, F. et al. (2022), “A framework to decarbonise the economy”, OECD Economic
Policy Papers, No. 31, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/4e4d973d-en.
[24]
European Commission (2021), EU Mission Soil Deal for Europe: Implementation plan,
https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-
09/soil_mission_implementation_plan_final_for_publication.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[33]
European Commission (2021), “Foresight in support of the EU Missions”, Directorate-General for
Research and Innovation, https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/news/all-research-
and-innovation-news/foresight-support-eu-missions-2021-10-21_en (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[36]
European Commission (2020), “Implementation Strategy for Horizon Europe Version 1.0”,
https://www.radionet-org.eu/radionet/implementation-strategy-for-horizon-europe-version-1-0-
published/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[29]
Hekkert, M. et al. (2020), “Mission-oriented innovation systems”, Environmental Innovation and
Societal Transitions, Vol. 34, pp. 76-79, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2019.11.011.
[17]
Hynes, W., M. Lees and J. Müller (eds.) (2020), Systemic Thinking for Policy Making: The
Potential of Systems Analysis for Addressing Global Policy Challenges in the 21st Century ,
New Approaches to Economic Challenges, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/879c4f7a-en.
[13]

===== PDF_PAGE 190 =====
188 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

IEA (2022), Energy Technology RD&D Budgets, https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-
product/energy-technology-rd-and-d-budget-database-2 (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[6]
IEA (2022), Net Zero by 2050: The need for net zero demonstration projects,
https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/76426d5e-0c9c-4f9f-809f-
feca6bde702e/Theneedfornetzerodemonstrationprojects.pdf (accessed on
26 February 2023).
[10]
IPCC (2022), Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change,
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_FullReport.pdf
(accessed on 5 March 2023).
[1]
IPCC (2022), Summary for Policymakers, Cambridge University Press,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157940.001.
[9]
Janssen, M. (2020), “Post-commencement analysis of the Dutch ‘Mission-oriented Topsector
and Innovation Policy’ strategy”, Utrecht University, https://www.uu.nl/sites/default/files/Post-
commencement%20analysis%20of%20the%20Dutch%20Mission-
oriented%20Topsector%20and%20Innovation%20Policy.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[23]
Janssen, M. et al. (2021), “The promises and premises of mission-oriented innovation policy—A
reflection and ways forward”, Science and Public Policy,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scaa072.
[16]
Jeudy-Hugo, S., L. Lo Re and C. Falduto (2021), “Understanding countries’ net-zero emissions
targets”, OECD/IEA Climate Change Expert Group Papers, No. 2021/03, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/8d25a20c-en.
[2]
Kruse, T. et al. (2022), “Measuring environmental policy stringency in OECD c ountries: An
update of the OECD composite EPS indicator”, OECD Economics Department Working
Papers, No. 1703, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/90ab82e8-en.
[5]
Kuittinen, H., W. Polt and M. Weber (2018), “Mission Europe? A revival of mission-oriented
policy in the EU”, in RFTE (ed.), RE:thinking Europe, No. September 2018, pp. 191-207,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334446593_KUITTINEN_H_POLT_W_WEBER_KM
_2018_Mission_Europe_A_revival_of_mission-
oriented_policy_in_the_European_Union_In_RFTE_-
_Council_for_Research_and_Technology_Development_Ed_RETHINKING_EUROPE_Positi
ons_on_S (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[19]
Larrue, P. (2021), “Mission-oriented innovation policy in Norway: Challenges, opportunities and
future options”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 104, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/2e7c30ff-en.
[15]
Larrue, P. (2021), “The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A
new systemic policy approach to address societal challenges”, OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers, No. 100, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
[14]
Larrue, P. and R. Santos (2022), “Towards a new stage in Norway’s science, technology and
innovation system: Improving the long-term plan for research and higher education”, OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 133, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/ce07b7c3-en.
[35]

===== PDF_PAGE 191 =====
 189
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Lebling, K. et al. (2020), “State of Climate Action: Assessing Progress toward 2030 and 2050”,
World Resources Institute, https://doi.org/10.46830/wrirpt.20.00001.
[3]
Mazzucato, M. (2018), “Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities”,
Industrial and Corporate Change, Vol. 27/5, pp. 803-815, https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dty034.
[11]
OECD (2022), Climate Tipping Points: Insights for Effective Policy Action, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/abc5a69e-en.
[8]
OECD (2021), Transport Strategies for Net-Zero Systems by Design, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0a20f779-en.
[12]
OECD (2019), Governance as an SDG Accelerator : Country Experiences and Tools, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0666b085-en.
[21]
OECD (2018), “Effective operation of competitive research funding systems”, OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 57, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/2ae8c0dc-en.
[27]
OECD and DDC (2022), Mission-oriented innovation needs assessment survey - Highlights &
instights on mission work, https://oecd-opsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/OECD-
DDC_Results-Mission-Needs-Assessment-Survey-2022.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[22]
Pietrobelli, C. and F. Puppato (2016), “Technology foresight and industrial strategy”,
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 110, pp. 117-125,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2015.10.021.
[37]
Roth, F. et al. (2022), Putting Mission-Oriented Innovation Policies to Work: A case study of the
German High-Tech Strategy 2025,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361209236_Putting_Mission-
Oriented_Innovation_Policies_to_Work_A_case_study_of_the_German_High -
Tech_Strategy_2025 (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[32]
Wallace, M. and I. Rafols (2015), “Research Portfolio Analysis in Science Policy: Moving from
Financial Returns to Societal Benefits”, Minerva, Vol. 53/2, pp. 89-115,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-015-9271-8.
[30]
Wanzenböck, I. et al. (2020), “A framework for mission-oriented innovation policy: Alternative
pathways through the problem–solution space”, Science and Public Policy,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scaa027.
[20]
Wittmann, F. et al. (2021), “Governing varieties of mission-oriented innovation policies: A new
typology”, Science and Public Policy, Vol. 48/5, pp. 727-738,
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scab044.
[25]

===== PDF_PAGE 192 =====
190 
Notes
1 The “Programme d’Investissements d’Avenir” (PIA) is now included in the “France 2030” recovery plan
2 The list of net-zero missions in the database is available at: https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/Online
%20list%20of%20NZ%20missions.pdf. Synthetic information on each case study is available at:
https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/Online%20list%20of%20NZ%20missions%20case%20studies.pdf.
3 The format of this chapter provides insufficient space to lay out the whole analysis of the different
contribution claims of net-zero missions, and do justice to the rich material collected through desk
research and interviews. The chapter focuses on selected components of the theory of change. The full
analysis and results will be presented in the forthcoming report.
4 The strengths and weaknesses of MOIPs by type are presented in detail in (Larrue, 2021[15]) and are
summarised in the annex available at https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/Online%20typology%20of%20
MOIPs.pdf.
5 For instance, the European Commission engaged in a multi-year foresight analysis in five mission areas
to strengthen reflexivity in the policy preparation process (European Commission, 2021[36]).
6 Technological road-mapping is a normative tool that makes detailed projections about future
technological developments and their socio-economic impacts. Foresight, on the other hand, is a
“systemic” exercise that analyses the long -term impacts of STI developments in order to contribute to
“better-informed policy decisions” (Pietrobelli and Puppato, 2016[37]).
7 “Adaptation to Climate Change”: support at least 150 European regions and communities to become
climate resilient by 2030; “Cancer”: work with Europe's “Beating Cancer Plan” to improve the lives of
more than 3 million people by 2030 through prevention, cure and solutions to live longer and better;
“Restore our Ocean and Waters by 2030”; “100 Climate -Neutral and Smart Cities by 2030”; “A Soil Deal
for Europe: 100 living labs and lighthouses to lead the transition towards healthy soils by 2030”.
8 The different mission co-ordination structures are analysed in (Larrue, 2021[14]).
9 This type of research is often referred to as “use-inspired basic research” in Stokes’ quadrant model of
scientific research (Channell, 1999[38]).
10 Team calculation based on data retrieved on 20 September 2022 for 289 policy instruments with the
grant duration question filled in the STIP Compass database, in the same countries with net-zero
missions covered in the OECD study (https://stip.oecd.org/stip/).
11 Not all policies and their respective missions had their budgets readily available. In order to develop a
budget range for individual net-zero missions where possible, the individual mission funding was taken
either “as is” (if explicitly given) or (if necessary) extracted from the overarching policy initiative, and
divided by the years in the mission’s individual funding horizon. A simple conversion into euros was then
made to ensure that values were comparable across currencies.
12 Information retrieved on the STIP-Compass Net Zero Portal, an inventory of 289 STI policy initiatives for
reaching net-zero (https://stip.oecd.org/stip/net-zero-portal).
13 Information retrieved on the MOIP Online Toolkit (https://stip.oecd.org/moip/).
 ECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 193 =====
 191
14 36% of the 131 respondents consider that “aligning resources across government or organisations” is
the biggest financial challenge, ahead of the mismatch between investment and strategic mission
objectives (34%); the lack of risk capital and high-risk, high-reward investments (31%); or the lack of
targeted resources (28%) (OECD and DDC, 2022[22]).
15 The different means of stakeholder engagement in mission definition were systematically reviewed in
the previous OECD MOIP report (Larrue, 2021[14]).
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

===== PDF_PAGE 194 =====


===== PDF_PAGE 195 =====
 193
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Emerging technologies can be pivotal for much needed transformations and
responses to crises, but rapid technological change can carry negative
consequences and risks for individuals, societies and the environment
including social disruption, inequality, and dangers to security and human
rights. The democratic community is increasingly asserting that “shared
values” of democracy, human rights, sustainability, openness,
responsibility, security and resilience should be embedded in technology,
but questions remain on how this should be accomplished. Using
“upstream” design principles and tools can help balance the need to drive
the development of technologies and to scale them up while helping to
realise just transitions and values-based technology. This chapter
documents and analyses a set of design criteria and tools that could guide
this approach to elaborate an anticipatory framework for emerging
technology governance.

6 Emerging technology governance:
Towards an anticipatory framework

===== PDF_PAGE 196 =====
194 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Key messages
 Emerging technologies are reshaping our societies. While they can be key to much -needed
transformations and responses to crises, they also present certain risks and challenges that
must be addressed if their potential is to be realised. Faced with this dou ble-edged nature of
emerging technology, good technology governance can encourage the best from technology
and can help prevent social, economic, and political harms.
 Actors at both the national and international levels are seeking guidance and agreement on how
to promote shared values in technology development and make innovation more responsible
and responsive to societal needs. A range of anticipatory governance mechanisms present a
way forward. Working further upstream in the innovation process, these tend to shift the focus
of governance from exclusively managing the risks of technologies to engaging stakeholders –
funders, researchers, innovators and civil society – in the innovation process and co-developing
adaptive governance solutions. While regul ators are a key stakeholder group in emerging
technology governance, a whole range of other actors can facilitate responsible innovation.
 Emerging technologies have unique governance needs. However, while there is no one -size-
fits-all approach, a general and anticipatory framework for the governance of emerging
technologies could be useful at the national or international level. For instance, it could help
provide a common language and tools built from experience to help address recurrent policy
issues across emerging technologies and ensure wider stakeholder engagement.
 The proposed framework aims to help guide the development of emerging technology
governance at both the national and international levels. It consists of a three -tiered structure,
comprising (i) values, (ii) design criteria, and (iii) tools. Discussion around the framework may
facilitate international technological co -operation in the governance of emerging technologies.
Suitable tools are necessary to operationalise design criteria. The chapter discusses a selected
tool for each of the three design criteria:
o Anticipation through strategic intelligence . Countries and the international community
should assess and enhance their strategic capacity to anticipate technological
developments and tec hnology governance needs. They should aim to deepen strategic
intelligence on new, emerging and/or key technologies through forward-looking technology
assessment (TA). Forward-looking TA both depends on and supports the expression of key
values, which underpin the analysis of potential benefits and harms, and the trajectories of
emerging technology.
o Inclusion and alignment through societal and stakeholder engagement upstream . Societal
and stakeholder engagement can enhance the democratic governance of emerg ing
technology, enabling deliberation on the values that should support and guide technological
development. Countries might not only sponsor programmes to advance communication
and consideration of emerging technology in public fora, but also build the ne cessary
linkages for exchange and co-development.
o Adaptivity through co -development of principles, standards, guidelines, and codes of
practice (soft law mechanisms). Countries and stakeholders could strengthen professional
guidelines, technical and normative standards, codes of conduct and good practices during
technological development, to promote an agile and adaptive system of governance.

===== PDF_PAGE 197 =====
 195
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Introduction
Emerging technologies have a central role to play in our collective future. They will help reshape t he
infrastructure and capacities of our societies and help drive our economies and our behaviour in new ways.
While problems like climate change and global health disparities cannot be solved by technology alone,
technology policy can be a pivotal factor in the responsiveness and resilience of our sociotechnical systems
in the face of crisis. section
In addition to the great promise of emerging technologies for green transitions and other crucial societal
objectives, rapid technological change can carry negative consequences and risks for individuals,
societies, and the environment. Relevant threats include social disruption, various kinds of inequity,
privacy, and human rights. For example, facial recognition and spyware are becoming a tool in mass
surveillance (Ryan-Mosley, 2022 [1]), social media is a known vector for the active propagation of
misinformation (Matasick, Alfonsi and Bellantoni, 2020 [2]), and reported mandatory involvement in
genomics research violates human rights standards (Wee, 2021[3]).
Emerging technology also carries major implications for distributive justice, geopolitics, and security. While
COVID-19 vaccines have been so critical in alleviating illness in high-income countries, they have reached
low- and middle-income countries unevenly. As previous chapters have discussed, calls for technological
independence – at best, “technological sovereignty” (Crespi et al., 2021 [4]) and at worst, new forms of
techno-nationalism (Capri, 2019[5]) – have strained international science and technology co -operation, in
the same vein as what might be called a “security turn” in innovation policy (see Chapter 1). The
globalisation of emerging technologies has also revealed supply chain vulnerabilities, with implications for
economic resilience.
Given the double -edged nature of emerging technology, good technology governance might encourage
the greatest societal benefit from technology and help prevent social, economic, and political harms.
Technology governance can be defined as “the process of exercising political, economic and administrative
authority in the development, diffusion and operation of technology in societies” (OECD, 2018[6]). In the
context of emerging technologies, the concept of governance has evolved in response to high uncertainty
(Folke et al., 2005[7]), risk (Baldwin and Woodard, 2009[8]), complexity (Hasselman, 2016[9]) and the need
for co-operation (Sambuli, 2021[10]). From setting rules on the integrity of science to establishing norms for
biosecurity and responsible neurotechnology (OECD, 2019 [11]), technology governance provides norms
and standards for both the bottom -up research that drives discovery, and the application and use of
technologies in society.
Perhaps for these reasons, technology governance has attracted increasing attention at a high political
level. In recent years, several international fora have focused on the topic of technology governance,
including France’s “Techn ology for Good” initiative (Tech For Good Summit, 2020 [12]), the
United Kingdom’s “Future Tech Forum” under its 2021 Group of Seven Presidency (HM Gov ernment,
2022[13]) and the initiative on “Democracy -Affirming Technologies” launched at President Biden’s Summit
on Democracy (The White House, 2021[14]). At the OECD, the Global Forum on Technolo gy was initiated
in 2022 to foster multi-stakeholder collaboration on digital and emerging technology policy (see Box 3.7),
and the 2021 Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation
sets norms for rethinking governanc e and regulatory policy to better harness the societal impacts of
innovation (OECD, 2021[15]). Furthermore, the United States and the United Kingdom recently announced
an initiative on “privacy-enhancing” technology (The White House, 2021[16]). In the same vein, the need for
“human-centric” artificial intelligence (AI) has become a refrain across the public and private sectors and
the subject of an influential soft-law instrument at the OECD (OECD, 2019[17]).
These nascent efforts at international technology governance often frame the challenge as one of better
regulation. Although it is no do ubt one component of the technology governance challenge, this framing
arguably does not address a general and recurring problem across critical and emerging technologies such

===== PDF_PAGE 198 =====
196 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

as AI, robotics and synthetic biology: as their development advances, their impa cts on society become
more profound, and their effects more entrenched (OECD, 2018[18]). It follows that shaping them, without
undue restriction, during the innovation process could carry great societal utility.
Efforts to exercise political, economic, or administrative authority during the innovation process might be
called “upstream” or “anticipatory technology governance”. Such an approach to governance shifts the
locus from exclusively managing the risks of technol ogies to engaging in the innovation process itself. It
aims to anticipate concerns early on, address them through open and inclusive processes, and align the
innovation trajectory with societal goals (OECD, 2018[18]). Of course, a balance must be struck between
preserving space for serendipitous technology development and shaping technology trajectories through
upstream governance.
Actors in the field of international technology governance invoke the need to promote “sh ared values” –
which in the context of these initiatives tend to include the values of democracy, human rights,
sustainability, openness, responsibility, security and resilience (e.g. (Council of Europe, 20 19[19]) or the
(US State Department, 2020[20]). To the extent that it can help embed values within the innovation process
itself, the anticipatory approach to technology governance might be better positioned to enact a stated goal
of values-affirming technology rather than post-hoc regulatory approaches.
This chapter does not aim to identify the core substantive values that should guide technological
development, or to reconcile different positions on them. Instead, it analyses the following question: given
that the democratic community is increasingl y asserting that values should be embedded in and around
technology (e.g., non-discrimination in A.I. algorithms), how should this be accomplished? Governments
are increasingly recognising and aiming to address this challenge. All these initiatives are bas ed on an
important premise: technology should no longer be viewed as an autonomous agent, but as a system
which, through governance, can better serve societal goals and values.
This chapter documents and analyses a set of design criteria and tools that co uld guide this approach to
elaborate an anticipatory framework for emerging technology governance. It is not intended to provide an
exhaustive review of design criteria and tools. Rather, it provides a framework for further analytical and
normative work, s uggesting ideas for the design of good technology governance systems. Figure 6.1
shows this framework, linking values, design criteria, and mechanisms and tools. The chapter explores
how actors can implement these design criteria for governance, using policy tools.
An anticipatory policy framework for emerging technology governance
In areas other than science, technology, and innovation (STI), anticipatory governance has emerged as a
key challenge for governments as they try to move from a reactive stance t owards addressing the
complexities and uncertainties of the economic and political present (OECD, 2022[21]). Likewise, actors in
the STI system have been laying the groundwork for anticipatory technology governance for some time
(Guston, 2013 [22]), in part under the banner of responsible research and innovation (von Schomberg,
2013[23]). An im portant aim of this upstream approach is to align research and development (R&D) of
cutting-edge technology with key societal goals, whether related to energy transitions, health systems or
mobility. To do so, anticipatory governance aims to identify possi ble stakeholder concerns and values,
address them through open and inclusive processes, and embed shared values in the development of new
technologies.
The responsible research and innovation approach argues that embedding responsibility and
accountability in the activities of researchers, firms and other actors can help orient new technologies
towards meeting grand challenges, rather than just decreasing the likelihood of undesirable effects of
technologies (Shelley-Egan et al., 2017 [24]; Owen, von Schomberg and Macnaghten, 2021 [25]). This is
consistent with the turn towards mission-oriented Innovation policy (Larrue, 2021[26]) and is the cornerstone

===== PDF_PAGE 199 =====
 197
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

of the Recommendation of the OECD Council on Responsible Innovation in Neurotechnology (OECD,
2019[11]).
Actors in both the public and private sectors are starting to take a more proactive approach to technology
governance, engaging in activities like anticipatory agenda-setting, test beds, and value-based design and
standardisation as a means of address ing societal goals upstream (OECD, 2018[6]). National actors are
beginning to promote a holistic view of the challenges and opportunities inherent to the governance of
emerging technologies. They are developing framewo rks to address recurring concerns and approaches,
thereby facilitating learning across technology areas. The National Academy of Medicine in the United
States, for instance, recently published a framework for the governance of emerging medical technologies
(Mathews, Balatbat and Dzau, 2022[27]). In addition, regulatory communities have already convened at the
OECD with the objective of reforming regulatory governance to better harness innovation (OECD, 2021[15]).
Taken as a whole, recent activities in emerging technology governance can be grouped under a policy
framework comprising values, design criteria and tools to putting shared values into pra ctice (see
Figure 6.1). These components lay the foundation for discussions on emerging technology governance.
Each of these elements is outlined below.
Figure 6.1. Elements of a framework for emerging technology governance

Source: Developed by the authors
Shared values: The foundation of emerging technology governance
Key values orient governance systems, and therefore ground the model. They are not always explicit, and
the tools described below may be necessary to surface them. This element answers the question of what
is worth ensuring, enabling, and embedding – and why. The (OECD, 2021[28]) has affirmed, among others,
democracy, human rights, good governance, security, sustainability, and open markets as shared values.
However, it is not the purpose of this chapter to posit particular values for the governance community. This
policy framework advances techniques of a process-based approach , laying out tangible strategies for
promoting values through design criteria and tools at different stages of the innovation pr ocess (OECD,

===== PDF_PAGE 200 =====
198 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

2018[6]). In practice, it sets out what might be considered guidance for responsible innovation and the
development of “values-based technology”.
Design criteria for emerging technology governance
Design criteria define the generalisable characteristics of good technology governance and responsible
innovation. Although this is not a comprehensive list, they should be based on the design criteria of
anticipation, inclusivity and alignment, adaptivity and international co-operation.
 Anticipation. Technology governance faces a dilemma. Governing emerging technologies too
early in the development process could be overly constraining, while governing them later can be
expensive or impossible. Navigating the so -called “Collingridge dilemma” (Worthington, 1982[29])
requires a form of governance that operates “upstream” and throughout the process of scientific
discovery and innovation. Prediction of a particula r technological trajectory is notoriously difficult
or even impossible, but exploration of possible technologic developments is necessary and can
create policy options.
 Inclusivity and alignment. Involving a broad array of stakeholder groups, including actors typically
excluded from the innovation process (e.g., small firms, remote regions, and certain social groups,
including minorities) is important to align science and technology with future user needs and values.
Inclusivity encompasses access both to t echnology itself and to the processes of technology
development, where enriching the diversity of participants is linked to the creation of more socially
relevant science and technology (OECD, forthcoming[30]). A related point is the need to include and
integrate diverse disciplines and approaches in the R&D process in order to build richer
understandings and fit-for-purpose design (Kreiling and Paunov, 2021[31]; Winickoff et al., 2021[32]),
(OECD, 2020[33]).
 Adaptivity. The pace, scope and complexity of innovation pose significant governance challenges
for governments (Marchant and Allenby, 2017[34]) and technology firms. As emerging technologies
can have unforeseen consequences, and adverse events or outcomes may occur, the governance
system must be adaptive to build resilience and stay relevant – a central tenet of the
Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation (OECD,
2021[15]). Adaptivity as a design criterion is closely related to anticipation, in that adaptive principles
and guidelines might be better suited to the fast pace of technological development.
Tools: Concrete means for action
An array of tools could help realise the above design criteria and embed values in the innovation process
(see Figure 6.1). They are the operational element of the framework, the means to take action and govern
emerging technologies. The following sections introduce three sets of tools that seek to advance the design
criteria: forward -looking technology assessment (TA) promotes anticipation; societal engagement
encourages inclusivity and alignment; soft law mechanisms can bolster adaptivity; for international co -
operation, all three tools are important. These tools have strong corollaries with known tools for regulators
(OECD, 2021[35]), but explicitly seek to engage STI actors – including research funders and agenda setters,
researchers and engineers, entrepreneurs and small business, and industry – further upstream, i.e., during
the technology development process. Together, these tools constitute a non-exhaustive package of policy
interventions to implement anticipation, inclusion and alignment, adaptivity and international co-operation.
The importance of international co-operation
The framework in this chapter (as shown in Figure 6.1) aims to guide both national and international policy
makers. The development, use and effects of technologies span national borders. The global scope of
technological challenges creates a need for an international approach to the g overnance of emerging

===== PDF_PAGE 201 =====
 199
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

technologies. This scope carries implications for the design of both national and international technology
governance systems. For national governments, this means that effective governance will require
international policy engagement . This engagement is already a clear policy trend, exemplified by the
numerous international activities noted above. International co-operation can grow around shared values,
and the sharing of tools and good practices, and these in turn can guide national approaches (see
Chapter 2).
Tailor to the case
The treatment of different technologies under such a holistic framework must not be a one -size-fits-all
approach. Governance needs for advanced nanomaterials will differ from those relating to new digital
platforms or synthetic biology. Indeed, the appropriate approach will depend on the technology’s
characteristics, such as:
 its level of readiness for commercialisation
 the profile of risks and potential benefits in the short and long term , as viewed by experts and the
public
 the nature of local, national, and international matters of concern
 the level of public concern.
Nevertheless, applying a common framework at the national and international levels is important as these
emerging technologies share certain characteristics, such as uncertain trajectories and impacts, enabling
broad areas of follow -up work, potential issues of public trust and the need for value -based reflection
(Mathews, 2017[36]). These common characteristics make common tools – including those that follow –
highly relevant.
Anticipation: Building strategic intelligence through technology assessment
The governance of early -stage technologies poses a set of challenges that require forward -looking
knowledge and analysis. This strategic intelligence can be defined as usable knowledge that supports
policy makers in understanding the impacts of STI and potential future developments. (Kuhlmann, 2002[37])
identified several processes that could provide such “futures intelligence”, such as technology assessment
(TA), technology foresight, anticipatory impact assessment and formative approaches to evaluation.
Emerging and early -stage technologies not only carry inherent uncertainties and complexities, but there
are also situations where their desirability is unclear (e.g., human germline gene editing) because the
promised novelty may well transcend existing ethical and political evaluations. The C ollingridge dilemma
sums up the challenge to find the right time to govern technology using dedicated standards, rules,
regulations and/or laws. To navigate this dilemma, new kinds of anticipation and strategic intelligence are
essential (Robinson et al., 2021[38]).
This section focuses on TA as a source of strategic intelligence. It presents the rationales for TA, the trends
shaping TA -based strategic intelligence and concludes with a review of chall enges and policy
considerations.
Rationales
TA is an evidence -based, interactive process designed to bring to light the societal, economic,
environmental, and legal aspects and consequences of new and emerging science and technologies. TA
informs public opinion, helps direct R&D, and unpacks the hopes and concerns of various stakeholders at
a given point in time to guide governance. Informally, various forms of TA have been in operation since

===== PDF_PAGE 202 =====
200 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

the dawn of science and technology policy. Formally, TA began 50 years ago with the establishment of the
Office for Technology Assessment (OTA) within the United States Congress.1 Its mission was to identify
and consider the existing and potential impacts of technologies, and their applications in society. OTA
emphasised the need to anticipate the consequences of new technological applications, requiring robust
and unbiased information on their societal, political, and economic effects.
Following in the footsteps of OTA, parliamentary TA institutions also emerged in Europe. The Netherlands
Organisation for Technology Assessment, for example, was established in 1986 to inform the Dutch
Parliament on the developments and potential consequences of new technologies. 2 Parliamentary TA
institutions proliferated around the globe throughout the 1990s and 2000s. TA and TA-like processes have
diversified with different (or expanded) objectives and are conducted in different situations and settings.
One evolution is the expansion from expert -oriented TA activities to more participatory TA approaches.
Participatory TA acknowledges that technology and society are entwined, further proof that underlying
values should be part of the TA process (Delvenne and Rosskamp, 2021[39]).
The main rationales of TA for emerging technology governance can fit into three broad and sometimes
overlapping categories.
TA for informing decision makers on key technology trends. One role of TA is as a process of sense-
making around emerging technologies, their state-of-the-art and their potential benefits and risks, be they
economic, societal, or environmental. When addressing emerging and converging technologies such as
synthetic biology, neurotechnology and quantum computing, TA must grapple with high de grees of
uncertainty along multiple dimensions. It therefore serves an important function in structuring disparate
and unclear information and translating it into usable information that can inform decision -making.
TA for deliberation by gauging stakehold ers’ hopes and concerns . Some forms of TA, such as
participatory TA, brings together different stakeholder groups, which not only stimulates public and political
opinion-forming on the societal and ethical aspects of STI, but also helps promote public trus t through
engagement and inclusion, one of the key design criteria in the framework. Participatory TA approaches
are particularly relevant for probing and highlighting hopes and concerns around potentially disruptive and
controversial technologies. Here, t he inclusion of relevant stakeholders is key not only for providing
democratic legitimacy and building trust, but also for deepening knowledge and expertise. Such
stakeholders include associations of small and medium -sized enterprises (SME), civil society
organisations, non -governmental agencies, trade unions, consumer groups and patient associations.
Thus, integrating a variety of stakeholders and insights can help create a form of “distributed intelligence”
(Kuhlmann et al., 1999[40]). However, critics of participatory TA highlight potential weaknesses, such as the
lack of impact on decision-making, the lack of support of mainstream science and technology policy, and
the exclusion of diverse kinds of knowledge (Hennen, 2012[41]).
TA as means of building and steering technological and industrial agendas. Building national
competitiveness through targeted investment in different areas of science and t echnology R&D is a key
aspect of STI policy, in which TA can play a supportive role. For example, following the Portuguese
Resolution of the Council of Ministers, the Ministry for Science and Higher Education commissioned the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) to develop 15 thematic research and innovation
agendas. Among them, the Industry and Manufacturing Agenda 2030 mobilised experts from R&D
institutions and companies to prospect potential opportunities and challenges for the Portuguese research
and innovation system in the medium and long term. The agendas’ main objective was to promote
collective reflection on the knowledge base required to pursue the scientific, technological, and societal
goals in a given thematic area. FCT facilitated a bottom-up approach through an inclusive process involving
experts from academia, research centres, companies, public organisations, and civil society. 3
Some TAs combine all three rationales. One example is the Novel and Exceptional Technology and
Research Advisory Committee (NExTRAC) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in the United States.
NIH undertakes horizon-scanning and sense -making of new technologies; deliberates on ethical, legal,

===== PDF_PAGE 203 =====
 201
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

and societal issues with a variety of stakeholders; and directly informs the NIH director in agenda -setting
(National Institutes of Health, 2021[42]).
Trends reshaping needs for TA-based strategic intelligence
Since the founding of the OTA 50 years ago, there has been growing recognition that timely intelligence
for STI policy and governance is necessary. Not only are technologies becoming more complex and more
pervasive, but they are evolving rapidly with potential new and disruptive risks to the econom y,
environment, and society. While prudent STI policy and governance for emerging technologies mobilises
strategic intelligence in various ways (Tuebke et al., 2001 [43]), new trends are challenging es tablished
strategic intelligence practices to incorporate new needs. Stemming from a mixture of technological
developments, new STI policy approaches and exogenous shocks, these trends produce new
requirements for TA processes and outcomes.
Technology trends: The pace of convergence . The escalating and transformative interaction among
seemingly distinct technologies, scientific disciplines, communities, and domains of human activity are
achieving new levels of synergism (Roco and Bainbridge, 2013[44]). This “convergence” at different loci of
the STI system means that ideas, approaches, and technologies from widely diverse fields of knowledge
become relevant and necessary for analysing the potential impacts of such convergent systems (National
Research Council, 2014[45]). Thus, convergence is placing new demands on strategic intelligence and TA
to capture its implications for sociotechnical change.
Innovation policy trends: Mission -orientation. One major STI policy trend is the shift towards greater
directionality (Borrás and Edler, 2020 [46]), a theme treated in detail in Chapter 5. So -called “m ission-
oriented” innovation policies seek to steer research and innovation systems so that they contribute to
achieving a societal goal (Robinson and Mazzucato, 2019[47]; Larrue, 2021[26]; Mazzucato, 2018[48]). Such
approaches require expounding values within ambitious, clearly defined, measurable and achievable goals
within a binding time frame (Lindner et al., 2021 [49]). Missions envision large transformations. They
pressure TA to move from techno -centric approaches focusing on a particular technology and its
ramifications, to exploring portfolios of technologies (e.g., related to mobility, energy production and waste
management) and how they might impact and drive transformations in value chains, industries, and whole
sociotechnical systems. In Germany, the federal government’s most recent funding instrument, “INSIGHT”,
promotes a holistic, fo rward-looking impact assessment of innovations. In addition to the natural and
technical sciences, the assessment includes ethical, social, legal, economic, and political considerations.
Acknowledging the increasing importance of social innovations, the fo cus shifts from “pure” technology
analysis to including societal developments in the innovation processes.
Crises and societal missions are driving what could be termed “solution -centric” TA. In the Netherlands,
the Rathenau Institute develops TAs focusing on problems such as deepfakes (synthetic media) (STOA,
2021[50]) and cyber resilience (van Boheemen et al., 2020 [51]). In the United States, the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) has been focusing on problems like reducing freshwater use in hydraulic
fracturing and power plant cooling and tracing the source of chemical weapons (GAO, 2020[52]). One recent
TA by GAO assesses the vaccine development chain for infectious diseases (see Figure 6.2). Here, the
goal was to identify key technologies that could enhance the ability of the United States to respond rapidly
and effectively to high-priority infectious diseases through rapid vaccine development.

===== PDF_PAGE 204 =====
202 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Figure 6.2. GAO: Assessment of vaccine development technologies

Source: (GAO, 2021[53]).
Exogenous forces: A proliferation of crises. Proliferating crises – e.g., the COVID -19 pandemic,
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and the subsequent energy crisis, and the local effects of
extreme events such as droughts, flooding and for est fires linked to climate change – reshape the
requirements for strategic intelligence. As a recent example, the rapid spread of COVID -19 caught most
nations off guard, requiring accelerated technology development and deployment of vaccines and
defibrillators, as well as knowledge about the virus, its spread, and mutations. Governments around the
world had to deal with a crisis featuring high scientific uncertainty, making rapid decisions that would affect
national populations and beyond, owing to mobilit y restrictions. Crises require urgent action. They put
pressure on the production of useful and timely strategic intelligence to shape actions in near-real time. TA
practitioners are also challenged to incorporate detailed investigations in the rapid scaling and diffusion of
new and emerging technologies, and to consider the societal, economic, and environmental effects of rapid
scaling.
Challenges and policy considerations
While global TA practice is still rife with techno -centric TA activities, solution-based and crisis-driven TAs
are increasing, bringing with them many questions regarding tools and processes. How wide a portfolio of
technologies is there to explore? What is the scope of the TA study? What sort of inclusion is needed to
build trust and harness collective intelligence? How rapidly is the intelligence from TA needed for decision-
making, and how does this balance with the depth and breadth of TA analysis?
The trend towards mission -oriented innovation policies (see Chapter 5) requires identifyi ng and enacting
core societal values that should drive technical change. TA is well placed to spell out these values,
particularly around controversial technologies. However, the increasing complexities of emerging
technologies and their impacts make it ne cessary to move beyond techno -centric perspectives. Adopting
a socio -centric approach, in turn, increases the complexity and information requirements of not only
technology options, but also of the value chains and systems involved.

===== PDF_PAGE 205 =====
 203
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Crises increase demands on rapid sourcing and scaling of technology solutions. However, uncertainty in
both the emerging technology options and the impacts generated as they scale increases the need for
controlled speculation on both the mechanisms for rapid scaling and the various facets of scaling. TA and
other intelligence sources, such as Foresight, are potential approaches to this end.
Box 6.1. Considerations for Robust Technology Assessment
1. Fitness for purpose. TA processes should be aligned with goals, such as (1) promoting
deliberation and gauging opinions, (2) providing information on key trends, and (3) building
agendas. Clear articulation of the different steps and activities that will fulfil the goals of the TA
will be valuable in determining the appropriate methods and approaches.
2. Clarity in scope. TA must be clear about which level of analysis it undertakes. Is it technology-
centric (e.g., quantum computing), does it have a value chain focus (e.g., food supply chains),
or does it take a sociotechnical-system perspective (e.g., mobility)? The scope and granularity
of the TA activity should be connected to the goal of the TA exercise, since each perspective
requires a different range of expertise, evidence tools and processes.
3. Smart and inclusive participation. TA requires participation of stakeholders with different
kinds of expertise and experience. The inclusion criteria depend on several constraints - the
resources available (i.e., staffing and funding), the scope (identifying relevant social groups
based on the topic and scope of TA), and the time available (limited time may require restricting
and focusing inclusion). Robust TA mobilises approaches such as the European Parliament’s
STEEPED approach (Van Woensel, 2021 [54]), which undertakes a comprehensive scan of
social, technological, economic, environmental, political, ethical and demographic aspects (Van
Woensel, 2020[55]) as a means to identify relevant stakeholders.
4. Explicit with regards to values, frames, and biases. Some forms of TA bring together
stakeholders to explore the impacts of technology on their professions, their personal lives, and
the broader sociotechnical systems that make up society. Naturally, different stakeholders will
have their own perspectives, and it is therefore important to understand (a) the contexts in
which professionals and lay persons operate, and (b) the various biases that may shape both
their opinions and reactions to others. Trustworthy TA brings to light values, frames, and biases.
5. Usability. TA is important for structuring disparate and unclear information, thereby providing
decision makers with understandab le interpretations. Robust TA should demonstrate careful
consideration of the target audience for the intelligence produced, and of this audience’s
absorptive capacity.
Inclusion and alignment: Engaging stakeholders and society upstream
Achieving an anticipatory system of technology governance will require recognising the central role of
citizens and stakeholders in ensuring the use of trusted and trustworthy technology in society.
Contemporary sociological accounts of the relationship between science , technology and society
demonstrate that knowledge is increasingly produced in contexts of application, publics are aware of how
STI affect their interests and values, and these interests can shape innovation (Jasanoff, 2007[56]). The
numerous forms of stakeholder participation in the communication and making of science and technology
contradict the so-called “deficit model” of publics as largely ignorant and irrational (Wynne, 1991[57]). But
misunderstandings still exist (Chilvers and Kearnes, 2015[58]). Upstream stakeholder engagement can help
frame – and reframe – the issues at stake (Jasanoff, 2003[59]) and “open up” important new questions

===== PDF_PAGE 206 =====
204 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

(Stirling, 2007[60]). It must also be translated into practice, so experimentation and knowledge sharing will
be important. Reviewing a large body of literature on societal engagement in the context of emerging
technologies, this section focuses on how to engage societal stakeholders upstream in tech nology
development to promote trust and trustworthiness.
Rationales: The need for upstream stakeholder engagement in innovation
Why is engagement necessary from the perspective of achieving an anticipatory and inclusive technology
governance system? First, engagement can surface societal goals for emerging technology at different
points in the complex innovation system, from agenda-setting to product design and diffusion, contributing
to a better alignment of technological development with social needs (von Schomberg, 2013 [23]). Such
alignment, unfolding in an iterative process, is one of the key functions of emerging technology governance
and responsible innovation.
Second, engaging societal stakehold ers earlier in the development process can help spot public
sensitivities and ethical shortcomings. Societal stakeholders bring experiential knowledge to societal
problems (OECD, 2020[33]) and offer the perspectives of future users (Kreiling and Paunov, 2021[31]). This
diversifies the types of expertise that are included during technology development, potentially pointing to
application challenges, or raising questions that innovato rs do not anticipate, even with their knowledge
and expertise. Such diversity has the potential to locate certain biases that are built into digital and other
technologies. Subsequent design considerations could help foster societal acceptance and avoid
backlashes and controversies that could lead to adoption failures (OECD, 2016 [61]), and manage
expectations for future products and services.
Third, stakeholder engagement promotes public understanding of science and te chnology, and enhances
the societal capacity for deliberating on technological issues. Such deliberation and consultation can breed
trust and enrich the relationship between science and society – although pre-ordained consultation can
undermine engagement as a trust-building exercise (Wynne, 2006[62]).
Fourth (and related to the first point), societal engagement presents an opportunity to bring representatives
from diverse cultures, demographics, ages, social structures, and skill levels to the innovation process.
Including their views, and building stakeholder capacity, not only addresses forms of rooted exclusion but
could render technologies more relevant to broader social groups.
Trends in upstream societal engagement
Use of new digital technologies. Digitalisation advanced the use of atypical engagement formats, such
as online tools or immersive virtual -reality technologies and simulation, although traditional paper -based
or face-to-face approaches are still used most frequently (BEIS, 2021[63]).
Iterative and sequenced engagement. Staged approaches have become more frequent. One example
is the “IdeenLauf” (“flow of ideas”) initiative during German Science Year 2022, which collected societal
impulses to inform science and research policy. First, citizens submitted over 14 000 questions for science.
Second, the questions were consolidated, complemented by additional texts to provide relevant co ntext,
and discussed among scientists and selected citizens. Third, citizens commented on the text via online
consultation. The final report was presented to policy makers and researchers in November 2022. 4
Directionality: Focus shifts from technologies to missions, goals, and future products. Emerging
technologies are often not yet embodied in future products or services, complicating exchanges between
technology experts and broader publics. One trending response to this challenge has been to focus the
engagement exercise on issues that societal stakeholders can more easily relate to. An example in the
area of future mobility is the “GATEway” project in the United Kingdom, which conducted live public trials
on connected and autonomous vehicles resulting in insights on public acceptance of, and attitudes
towards, driverless vehicles (BEIS, 2021[63]).

===== PDF_PAGE 207 =====
 205
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Focus on diversity . There exists momentum to ensure age, ethnic, gender, cultural and other forms of
diversity in the make -up of the “publics” engaged in consultation. However, practitioners still perceive a
diversity gap both in the theory and practices of engagement, resulting in problems for both sides. On the
one side, some communities are not solicited and are thus unable to provide inputs. On the other side,
technology experts do not learn about the needs and values of these future users.
Upstream societal engagement: Three modes and examples
Engagement techniques can be categorised under three main g roups, corresponding to their different
purposes (Figure 6.3). Mode 1 (capacity-building) can be viewed as a prerequisite that establishes the
conditions for effective societal engagement and democratic governance. Mode 2 (communicate and
consult) gathers the views of citizens or informs them, which may have an indirect influence on technology
governance decisions. Mode 3 (co -construct technology development) engages societal stakeholders
more directly in the construction of science and technology.
Figure 6.3. Each engagement mode comes with a set of engagement techniques

Source: Developed by the authors.
Clarity on the rationale for stakeholder engagement and its timing – during, before or in parallel to the
technology development process – is essential when deciding on the suitable societal engagement
technique. Deliberative capacity-building (Mode 1) acts as foundation or enabler of societal engagement
and occurs during and alongside innovation processes. S ocietal engagement exercises before or during
the research planning phase tend to focus on communicating with or consulting societal stakeholders
(Mode 2). Engagement efforts to co -construct science and technology pathways (Mode 3) occur during
development, e.g., of prototypes or testing at scale.
Mode 1: Building deliberative capacity
Anticipatory governance has been defined as “ a broad-based capacity extended through society that can
act on a variety of inputs to manage emerging knowledge -based technologies while such management is
still possible” (Guston, 2013[22]). Mode 1 activities (see Table 6.1) help build the capacity of publics and
innovators to engage in deliberative processes and contribute co nstructively to governance discussions.
They can include techniques (such as communication training) aimed at scientists and innovators,

===== PDF_PAGE 208 =====
206 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

programmes to involve them in the science policy process, and multidisciplinary work that embraces the
social sciences and humanities. Other engagement techniques (like science and science policy training)
focus on journalists and the media.
Table 6.1. Engagement techniques and rationales: Mode 1
Mode 1: Building deliberative capacity
Techniques and
rationales
 interdisciplinary education programs (e.g., in high school; higher education; science, technology,
engineering and mathematics [STEM]; or lifelong learning) to create interest in science, scientific
literacy and science policy
 education for STEM trainees in social science, humanities, and the policy process
 inclusive community-building around research infrastructures
 online information available to public in accessible formats (repositories, podcasts, games,
competitions)
 media and communication training to build the capacity of innovators and scientists to engage with
the public
 foresight exercises to identify early warning signs and enable governance debate.

These activities also tend to focus on assembling and empowering specific stakeholder groups around
technology development, design, and governance. For instance, the European Human Brain Project built
an inclusive community for the EBRAINS research infrastructure. This network of external collaborators
(including patient associations, clinicians, and industry) brings together those who are particularly
concerned by future technology applications.5 The project also provides information platforms and games
to build knowledge and skills at the interface of science and society. Two examples in the field of synthetic
biology are the citizen game “Nanocrafter” and the annual “iGem” student competition,6 both of which also
feature community-building elements. The European Commission’s e -learning platform, “Digit al Skillup”,
is designed for both beginners and advanced users. It helps them explore emerging technologies and their
impact on everyday life and offers training on topics like cybersecurity or the digital revolution. 7 In the
United States, the Science and Technology Policy Fellowships of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science place talented scientists and engineers in positions of federal policy making,
furthering the training of a cadre of communicators and contributors across the science and society divide.8
Mode 2: Communication and consultation
Mode 2 pertains to engagement techniques aiming to gather stakeholder views. While their outcomes and
influence on the innovation process are often indirect, they do have capacity -building eleme nts. For
example, a UK citizen jury exercise to understand public attitudes towards ethical AI also resulted in their
gaining a better understanding of automated decision systems (BEIS, 2021[63]).
Table 6.2. Engagement techniques and rationales : Mode 2
Mode 2: Communication and consultation
Techniques and
rationales
exhibitions to engage publics in “engagement spaces” such as science museums, libraries ,
universities, and science cafés
citizen juries, citizen assembly, consensus conference, World Wide Views, citizens’ dialogues
foresight and gaming
focus groups and surveys for public consultation to gather views
lived experience council to consult with those concerned
artists in residence programmes to promote exchanges between scientists and artists and engage
the local community.

===== PDF_PAGE 209 =====
 207
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Mode 2 contains a wide array of mechanisms and processes for soliciting views and attitudes towards
emerging technology (see Table 6.2). Processes can vary from a one -off citizen dialogue to a sequence
of meetings and conversations lasting many months. An important consideration across many Mode 2
engagement techniques is the need to design engagement spaces. This includes no t only the location’s
selection, accessibility, and institutional affiliation, but also the types of event formats and interactivity. For
example, public outreach in science museums may take the form of exhibitions or room for
experimentation. At Science Café events, on the other hand, scientists may engage with lay persons and
discuss their research. Each form of consultation requires a different engagement space.
Mode 3: Co-constructing science and technology development
Mode 3 encompasses the wide varie ty of modalities for direct contribution by stakeholders and even
publics to the creation of new knowledge and technology. As shown in Table 6.3, these techniques and
processes promote exchanges between innovators and societal stakeholders that may explore complex
and controversial questions and capture deeper underlying values and trade -offs. The exchange is
bidirectional, resulting in the “co -construction” or “co -creation” of STI (König, Baumann and Coenen,
2021[64]; Kreiling and Paunov, 2021[31]).
Table 6.3. Engagement techniques and rationales : Mode 3
Mode 3: Co-construct technology development
Techniques and
rationales
 participatory agenda-setting to co-create or inform research agenda
 citizen science, science shops, games to conduct community-based (participatory) research
 participatory TA includes affected social actors, interest groups, consumers, and members of the
public alongside professional experts and policy makers
 “maker spaces” for co-creation or prototype testing (e.g., FabLabs or Living Labs)
 transdisciplinary research combining knowledge from different scientific disciplines with that of
public- and private-sector stakeholders and citizens
 collaborative platforms using convergence spaces for technological development and diffusion
 guidelines and policies to govern scientific practice.

Mode 3 engagements can occur at different stages in the innovation process.
 Agenda-setting: engagement typically occurs in participatory agenda -setting exercises, using
formats like “decision theatres” or “social foresight labs”. The rationale is to co -create or inform
research agendas (Matschoss et al., 2020[65]) by involving, for example, patient groups (Scheufele
et al., 2021[66]). It can also be to integrate the needs of rural areas and indigenous communities in
research and innovation processes (Schroth et al., 2020[67]).
 New knowledge creation: community-based research strives to build equitable partnerships
based on long-term commitment and applies interventions that ar e beneficial to all stakeholders
involved (Baik, Koshy and Hardy, 2022 [68]). This category also includes different forms of citizen
science and transdisciplinary research (OECD, 2020[33]), both of which are premised on the power
of experiential and acquired expertise in the creation of new knowledge. One example is the
German funding initiative for citizen science, which is extending support to 28 projects in two
phases between 2017 and 2024.9
 Prototype development: the prototype stage is an important innovation milestone, and
engagement is increasingly considered critical to its success. The user -centric methods for the
development and testing of prototypes have been evolving. For example, (Rodriguez-Calero et al.,
2020[69]) identified 17 strategies to engage stakeholders with prototypes during front -end design
activities in the area of medical devices.

===== PDF_PAGE 210 =====
208 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

 Deployment and testing at scale: Maker spaces have been used to engage societal
stakeholders. For example, the “Lorraine Fab Living Lab” 10 tests prototypes and prospectively
assesses innovative usages, combining elements of FabLabs and Living Labs (Engels, Wentland
and Pfotenhauer, 2019[70]).
 Engagement governing scientific conduct: These occur alongside technology development
processes and could result in the development of guidelines, such as on human genome editing
(Iltis, Hoover and Matthews, 2021 [71]). The term “open innovation” describes the opening of the
innovation process. In the private sector, open innovation happens when future consumers are
included in “customer co -creation” activities (Piller, Ihl and Vossen, 2010 [72]), resulting in
“prosumers” (Rayna and Striukova, 2015 [73]). Initiatives are underway to build industry tools for
engagement. One such initiative is the “S ocietal engagement with key enabling technologies
(SOCKETS”)11 project supported by the European Commission (2020 -23), which develops and
tests methods to engage c itizens in the industrial development and use of key enabling
technologies.
Challenges and policy considerations
Despite their importance, establishing and running engagement initiatives upstream in the innovation
process can be challenging, both from a procedural and organisational standpoint. Procedural challenges
relate to the context and impact of the engagement exercise. Concretely, this means using the appropriate
channels to ensure that inputs from engagement reach relevant decision makers and innova tors and that
engagement exercises are not perceived as an additional requirement which is met with a “tick -box
mentality” of innovators. Moreover, processes tend not to recognise that experts and communities have
different stakes, with traditional decisio n makers having more to gain and marginalised communities
potentially having more to lose. Hence, another issue lies in the power relations between technical experts
and societal stakeholders (see Chapter 4). Implementing meaningful participation requires capacity-
building and training, as well as developing formats, procedures and a framework that enable members of
the public to participate in the process (Schroth et al., 2020[67]).
Organisational challenges revolve around selecting and motivating stakeholders. In this respect, both the
scope of the perceived societal impact of the technology and the societal relevance of the research are
key. In the case of emerging technologies, relevance and urgency for stakeholders may not be high (de
Silva et al., 2022[74]). Still, some technology solutions may affect a smaller group of (local) stakeholders,
while others could impact broader groups and cover a geographically lar ger (global) scale. Lack of
relevance, expertise, trust, skills, motivation, incentives, time, and financial resources are common
engagement barriers across all stakeholder groups.
As diversity, equity and inclusion become dedicated goals, stakeholder differences in terms of knowledge,
ways to communicate, values, expectations, contextual understanding, and routes to forming opinions may
become even more pronounced. Allowing an open yet focused debate by balancing between an overly
narrow and an open framing of the issues is essential to handle differences and disagreement, facilitating
deliberation without forcing consensus (Bauer, Bogner and Fuchs, 2021[75]).

===== PDF_PAGE 211 =====
 209
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 6.2. Policy considerations for conducting effective societal engagement
Procedural aspects
Deploy engagement techniques sequentially to bring societal stakeholders into the innovation
process at different stages. This means organising a series of societal engagements so that they build
on each other and inform different dimensions of the technology governance process.
Frame engagement around societal missions and goals , as early-stage emerging technology may
appear abstract to societal stakeholders. Effective engagement uses narratives that focus on anchors
to which stakeholders can relate.
Provide training and incentives to innovators to nurture a culture of engagement and inclusion, so
that engagement outcomes are linked with decis ion-making processes and embedded in innovators’
core activities.
Organisational aspects
Identify and select relevant stakeholders depending on the scope of the engagement exercise and
the technology’s societal impact. Consider mobilising civil society or advocacy groups that represent
societal members with high personal stakes in the R&D process, as well as positively seeking out
diversity.
Make diversity, equity, and inclusion key design goals for engagement in Mode 1, Mode 2, and Mode
3. This means involving various types of expertise and creating an environment that allows an open yet
focused debate, facilitating deliberation without forcing consensus. Funding structures can motivate
innovators to engage with broad and diverse communities.
Build capacity and minimise barriers to entry for societal stakeholders to participate in engagement
exercises. Suitable formats and effective procedures are essential to attract and retain committed
participation.
Adaptivity: Co-developing principles, standards, guidelines, and codes of
practice
Compared to strategic intelligence and societal engagement, norms and institutions are the more typical
tools of technology governance through, for example, regulation, rules, and standards by authoritative
bodies. However, while they will be necessary in certain situations, formal regulatory approaches that
use norms to define permissible and impermissible activities, along with sanction or incentives to ensure
compliance, may present disadvantages in more upstream contexts. First, the speed of technological
advances makes it difficult for regulation to keep up. Second, novel ethical, social, and economic issues
can operate outside or across regulatory jurisdiction and expertise. Third, applications across multiple
industries and government agencies can create interagency co-ordination problems. For all these reasons,
formal regulatory approaches may be ill-suited to govern emerging technology, at least in the earlier stages
of development (Marchant and Wallach, 2015 [76]; Hernández and Amaral, 2022 [77]; OECD, 2019 [78]).
Further, attempts to govern emerging technology could derail innovative approaches, prompting concerns
that companies and technologies may simply move across borders (Pfotenhauer et al., 2021[79]).
The OECD is rethinking regulatory policy to document and encourage more agile regulatory governance
using a wide array of approaches (OECD, 2021 [15]). One such approach might be to use principles,
standards, guidelines, and codes with moral or political force but without formal legal enforceability. These

===== PDF_PAGE 212 =====
210 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

“soft law” approaches may provide a number of advantages in terms of multisector co-operation and cross-
jurisdictional flexibility (García and Winickoff, 2022 [80]). For instance, (Gutierrez, Marchant and Michael,
2021[81]) have pointed to the adaptivity of soft law in governing AI, noting that “AI’s dynamic and rapidly
evolving nature … make it challenging to keep in place. In these scenarios, soft law…can transc end the
boundaries that typically limit hard law and, by being non-binding, serve as a precursor or as a complement
or substitute to regulation.” Nevertheless, its effective deployment has both opportunities and challenges.
Indeed, soft law is an increasin gly important mode of governance for emerging technology (Hagemann,
Huddleston and Thierer, 2019 [82]). In the current context, soft law – in all its different forms -- should be
considered an important tool for achieving an emerging technology governance system that is more
anticipatory, inclusive, and adaptive.
Rationale
Guidelines, standards and codes of practice feature different types and rationales. Organisations create
high-level principles that communicate a joint commitment to ideals and values -based operations.
Standard-setting bodies – such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) develop technical norms to gui de communities of
practice. Professional groups and firms also often ask their members to follow certain rules and codes of
conduct. Governments can publish guidelines while threatening to pass enforceable laws as a backstop in
the event of insufficient ad herence. Finally, voluntary programmes, labels or certification schemes may
drive markets, and ultimately the adoption of best practices.
Trends and examples
Public international principles: OECD recommendations
In situations where new international legal treaties are rarely achieved, principles can be an attractive
modality for international, transnational and/or global actors to make moral and political commitments with
some flexibility and accommodation for differences and changing circumstances. Princip les can operate
at the international level through a number of organisational sources, from the United Nations to the Council
of Europe and the OECD. The OECD offers salient examples of public international recommendations that
present principles in the field of technology governance. OECD recommendations feature regular reporting
requirements by Adherents, to promote progress in their implementation as well as transparency. Recent
recommendations and implementation work include:
 May 2019: the Recommendatio n of the Council on Artificial Intelligence (OECD, 2019[17]), under
which the OECD convened a multi -stakeholder group, developed a practical toolkit, created an
“observatory” of existing policies to promote mutual learning, and led to the establishment of a new
OECD Working Party on AI Governance
 December 2019: the Recommendation on Responsible Innovation in Neurotechnology (OECD,
2019[11]), which s eeks to anticipate problems during the course of innovation, steer technology
towards the best outcomes, and include many stakeholders in the innovation process.
 October 2021: the Recommendation for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation
(OECD, 2021[15]), which provides guidance for policy makers to design agile regulations that can
address the regulatory challenges and opportunities arising from emerging technologies.
Public-private international standards
Other important technology governance mechanisms arise at the public and private interface. As a case
in point, ISO is an independent, non -governmental international organisation with a membership of 167
national standards bodies. Among o ther things, ISO sets many technical standards in the arena of

===== PDF_PAGE 213 =====
 211
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

emerging technology, which are developed through a stakeholder -driven process at a fairly high level of
technical detail. ISO/TR 12885:2018 on health and safety practices in occupational settin gs of
nanotechnologies is a good example of a technical governance standard. 12 This standard focuses on the
occupational manufacture and use of manufactured nano-objects, and their aggregates and agglomerates
greater than 100 nanometres.
Codes of practice
Codes of scientific and engineering practice
Novel and specialised codes of practice in science and engineering are sometimes deployed before new
technologies hit the market, when their potential risks and harms are anticipated but not well-known, or the
work has significant ethical implications. These can cross over into public funding agencies through policy.
A good example of guidelines that have influenced both the public and private sectors are those developed
by the International Society of Stem Cell Research (ISSCR) (Box 6.3).
Box 6.3. Guidelines on the ethics of stem cell research as a self-regulatory approach
ISSCR is an independent global non -profit organisation that promotes excellence in stem cell science
and therapies. Founded in 2002, the ISSCR consists of 4 500 scientists, educators, ethicists, and
business leaders across 80 countries. ISSCR members make a commitment to uphold the ISSCR
Guidelines for Stem Cell Research and Clinical Translation ( ISSCR Guidelines), an “international
benchmark for ethics, rigor, and transparency in all areas of practice.” 1
Although not directly enforceable, the guidelines provide regulators and research funders with a
framework for the regulatory oversight of stem cell research and clinical translation, including recent
advances related to embryo models, chimeric embryos and mitochondrial replacement (Anthony,
Lovell-Badge and Morrison, 2021[83]). The guidelines can be indirectly enforced by research institutions,
funding agencies and scientific journals that require scientists to comply (Marchant and Allenby,
2017[34]).
In 2021, the ISSCR updated its guidelines to address advances in stem cell science and other relevant
fields since the previous update in 2016. These advances included human embryo culture, organoids,
mitochondrial replacement, human genome editing and prospects for obtaining in vitro -derived
gametes. The guidelines directly address new ethical, social and policy issues that have arisen, and
recommendations for oversight.
1. https://www.isscr.org/guidelines (accessed 22 September 2022).
Industrial codes of practice
Many companies find it advantageous to work at the industry -wide level to design joint solutions to
governance in the form of self -regulation. For example, the biopharmaceutical industry is experiencing
intense changes, with a number of frontier technologies impacting the way it does research,
commercialises its products, and collaborates with partners and stakeholders across the world. At the
industry level, the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers and Asso ciations has
responded by creating new bodies, like global future health technologies and bioethics working groups, to
consider the next generation of risks, benefits, and standards, with a view to updating its “Code of
Practice”.13 Another example is the I nternational Gene Synthesis Consortium (Box 6.4), which has
developed a strong network and commitment to biosecurity measures in the industry.

===== PDF_PAGE 214 =====
212 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Box 6.4. International Gene Synthesis Consortium
Synthetic biology, also known as “engineering biology”, is a multidisciplinary field that “integrates
systems biology, engineering, computer science, and other disciplines to achieve the ’modification of
life’ or even the ’creation of life’ via the redesign of existing natural systems or the development of new
biological components and devices” (Sun et al., 2022[84]). Several major breakthroughs have occurred
over the last two decades, including the development of the first synthetic cell at the James Craig Venter
Institute in 2010 (Trump et al., 2020[85]), advances in DNA synthesis and assembly (Sun et al., 2022[84])
and the adoption of the Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats-associated protein
system (CRISPR/Cas) for genome editing in eukaryotic cells (Cong et al., 2013[86]). Like other emerging
technologies, synthetic biology is a rapidly advancing field that has outpaced its current regulatory
framework and is likely to have disruptive impacts.
The power to design organisms carries risks in terms of biosecurity. Fo rmed in 2009, the International
Gene Synthesis Consortium (IGSC) is an industry -led group of gene synthesis companies and
organisations. Currently, IGSC members represent approximately 80% of commercial gene synthesis
capacity worldwide. IGSC was created t o develop the Harmonised Screening Protocol, now in its
second version. Under the protocol, IGSC members test the complete DNA and translated amino acid
sequences of every double -stranded gene order against a curated regulated pathogen database
derived from international pathogen and toxin sequence databases.1
The current version of the Harmonised Screening Protocol, which amounts to a private standard
enacted to protect the public, was launched in 2017.2 More recently, in the context of the rapid pace of
technological change in the field, some industry and academic actors have publicly called for a process
to update the protocol that should include the synthesis companies themselves, policy makers, science
and technology funders (both public and private), a nd the broader synthetic biology community
(Diggans and Leproust, 2019[87]).
1. https://genesynthesisconsortium.org (accessed 23 September 2022).
2. https://genesynthesisconsortium.org/wp-content/uploads/IGSCHarmonizedProtocol11-21-17.pdf (accessed 20 September 2022).
Self-regulatory product or process standards
Technology-based standards determine the specific characteristics (size, shape, design, or functionality)
of a product, process, or production method. These standards are an important form of governance that
can emanate from both the private sector (e.g., de facto standards in the form of dominant designs) and
the public sector (e.g., government-regulated vehicle safety standards or mobile phone frequency bands).
Environmental non-governmental organisations (NGOs) are partnering with industry on the development
of product standards for new food products driven by new and emerging technologies. These partnerships
can help generate standards or certification schemes that may command premiums in the market.
Co-developed product standards have potential utility for “upstream governance” because retailers can
leverage their market power to influence how technology developers are considering unanticipated
consequences throughout the supply chain, from design and sourcing to disposal. Companies are
accountable as they have a duty to report on their activities to their investors. They have the power to
“bake in” these concerns as the new technologies, chemicals and innovations develop.
Recently, the Environmental Defense Fund, a US -based NGO, worked with the private sector to develop
principles and standards to ensure the environmental sustainability of cell -based meat and seafood. This
information allows compani es to assess these products’ potential impacts on human health, the
environment and society, and to communicate the implications to stakeholders clearly and transparently

===== PDF_PAGE 215 =====
 213
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

(Environmental Defense Fund, 2021[88]). An important question was how to translate the mechanisms and
principles of co-design and upstream engagement into practice. Involving multiple stakeholders was key
to ensuring the quality and legitimacy of the guidance.
“By-design” approaches
With the “ethics -by-design” or “sustainability -by-design” approach to governance, some firms and
regulatory agencies assess and build in the sustainability or ethical implications of new technologies at
different stages of technology development. The “Safe(r )-by-Design” concept, for instance, encourages
industry to reduce uncertainties and risks to human and environmental safety, starting at an early phase
of the innovation process and covering the whole innovation value chain (or life cycle for product
development) (OECD, 2022[89]).
This ethics-by-design approach seeks to embed ethics and societal values – such as privacy, diversity,
and inclusion – through clear protocols (e.g., search protocols in AI). Analytical tools can serve to assess
privacy impacts, safety impacts, diversity, inclusion, and human rights impacts, and avoid bias. At the
December 2021 Summit for Democracy, the United States announced new international technology
initiatives including International Grand Challenges on Democracy -Affirming Technologies to drive global
innovation on technologies that embed democratic values and principles (Matthews, 2021[90]). In July 2022,
the United States, and the United Kingdom co-launched “a set of prize challenges to unleash the potential
of privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs) to combat global societal challenges”, making sure privacy and
trust are at the heart of the design process” (The White House, 2022[91]).
Challenges and policy considerations
Principles, guidelines, standards, and codes of practice face some challenges. First, they may lack the
formal legitimacy of regulations, whic h are derived from governments’ legislative authority. This means
that they may escape some of the formal procedures required to enact regulations, such as transparent
and accountable public comment periods, and structured stakeholder engagement.
Second, the efficacy of these systems must be better addressed should “soft law” become an even more
important tool (Hagemann, Huddleston and Thierer, 2019[82]). Third, the existence of too many non-binding
sets of norms in a particular terrain may cause overlaps, impeding efficacy across the complex system of
actors and institutions that make up global governance (Black, 2008[92]).
Box 6.5. Policy considerations for co-developing principles, guidelines, standards, and codes
Perform empirical analysis of diverse mechanisms and tools , recognising its interplay with
regulation to optimise their use, further increasing the credibility and effectiveness of technology
governance.
Co-design
Ensure “meaningful” participatory mechanisms where concerned stakeholders (both citizens and
SMEs) are invited into the design of both technologies and governance systems. Principles, standards,
guidelines, and codes of practice should be transparent and built on evidence, so that they are
accountable not only to industry, but to the public.
Perform outreach to ensure effective standardisation. This includes SMEs, which often do not have the
resources to contribute effectively to standardisation. Include user groups (like patients), regulatory
authorities, social scientists, philosophers, and civil soci ety in standard -setting. This co -creation is

===== PDF_PAGE 216 =====
214 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Towards international co-operation on anticipatory governance
Technological sovereignty as a concept is becoming more pronounced, and more countries are striving for
technological sufficiency – if not clear advantages – in specific domains (see Chapter 2). Yet this
movement towards national or regional approaches might be out of step with current demands. The global
nature of the challenges facing the world today requires greater technological (or other) co-operation. The
question is whether – and how – the technological governance framework addresses these dynamics.
The section above pitched the use of such design criteria and tools at the national level. This framework
could also encourage technological co-operation at the international level – first, by reinforcing commitment
to common values such as human rights, responsibility, economic co -operation, and democratic
governance; and second, by paving the way for the development of international approaches, such as
good strategic intelligence, stakeholder and societal engagement, and mechanisms like OE CD
recommendations. As stated previously, international co -operation is a consideration for good emerging
technology governance that spans the gamut of values, design criteria and tools.
International co-operation on TA and strategic intelligence
As explored in the above section, anticipatory tools can enhance the capacity to spot issues, understand
a given technological and governance landscape, and ultimately make better governance decisions.
Across the world, TA, strategic foresight, and other forms of s trategic intelligence (such as horizon -
scanning) are being applied at the national level to inform national STI policies and technology governance.
One clear gap in the landscape of strategic intelligence lies in the international arena. International
technology decision-making on the possible limits on geoengineering,14 human augmentation15 and AI will
require strategic intelligence sources that are trusted across countries and sectors. Commonly recognised
evidence can serve as the foundation of agreement o n different forms of governance. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which has supported climate co-ordination and co-operation
critical in the early phases of development of soft law instruments for self -regulation. For instance, co-
design will enhance the likelihood of public acceptance, which will facilitate the use of technology at
scale to enhance and save patient lives.
Compliance
Develop oversight mechanisms for implementation and compliance, including third -party audits of
technology governance as part of an effective quality control infrastructure.
Consider other mechanisms like liability regimes with contractual force, external ethics committees,
insurance companies that might require compliance and performance, and government off -ramps (if
conditions of governance not satisfied, government regulator will step in).
Strengthen the use of and compliance with governance tools. Tie funding, publication, and regulatory
approval to compliance with safety standards; access; transparency; and ethical, legal, and social
principles.
By-design
Change the incentives for researchers to promo te more transparent processes for the selection,
funding, and monitoring of early prototype plans for technology innovation.
Funders could require and provide adequate incentives for peer -review and community engagement
during the early design phases of disruptive research.

===== PDF_PAGE 217 =====
 215
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

under the Paris Agreement/COP21, is a case in point. Such global forward -looking analysis could be
informed by and li nk to so -called “global observatories”, which aggregate policy approaches and
technology developments. The AI Observatory at the OECD is a good model, with its searchable database
of AI policies and normative instruments throughout the world, and its hub for expert blog posts and articles.
Some have proposed a Global Observatory for Gene Editing which would serve a broader set of functions,
notably to enrich ethical, legal, and cultural understandings, and encourage debate among the global
citizenry (Jasanoff and Hurlbut, 2018[93]). Collaboration around such efforts at the international level could
pool insights on the development and potential impacts of technology, as well as build best practices for
collective strategic intelligence.
International stakeholder and public engagement
In this vein, the development of emerging technologies has ramifications for the nature of citizen
engagement. For example, geoengineering techniques could affect weather patterns or water supply, with
impacts that are not restricted to national borders. AI applications exert profound impacts not only on
national, but global, economies. Growing calls for international public deliberation exercises, such as a
global citizens' a ssembly on genome editing (Dryzek et al., 2020 [94]), evince the co -emergence of
technology and new kinds of global citizenship. Going from the traditionally local or national level to the
global scale will require adapting engagement techniques, for example by using formats like World Wide
Views.16 However, deciding which stakeholder groups should be involved in global efforts raises questions
related to the nature of international publics and the identification of relevant stakeholders.
International co-operation on principles, standards, guidelines, and codes of practice
Addressing governance challenges at the country level runs the risk of being ineffective at best and
counter-productive at worst, as p articular jurisdictions could exploit the governance gaps to gain
advantage. Several of the governance modalities (such as the OECD recommendations) discussed in this
chapter operate at an international level, offering an opportunity to co -ordinate and eve n harmonise
different jurisdictions’ approaches. Further, standards emanating from industry groups or public -private
partnerships can work transnationally, across and through jurisdictions linked by supply chains, markets,
and border-crossing actors.
Conclusion
Technology is driving economies, political systems, and cultures. It promises great advances for human
well-being, supporting solutions to grand challenges such as green transitions and pandemics. However,
technology developers and users, as well as policy makers, must be mindful of a fine balance between
enabling innovation for societal benefit while reducing potential risks to democratic values, e.g., equity,
transparency, accountability, that may undermine human rights or have other undesirable societal, political,
or economic consequences. While important thinking and tools to regulate technology continue to develop,
it is important to note that a co -evolutionary process is taking place between technological development
and today’s societal structu res. The social and political shaping of technology happens through a myriad
of ways and policies, including intellectual property laws, science agenda -setting and funding, and
regulatory policy. Here, an anticipatory framework featuring generalisable desi gn criteria and tools can
help guide the innovation process to embed values more purposefully into the technology development
process.
Anticipation, the inclusion and integration of stakeholders, and adaptability are key design criteria allowing
more explicit consideration of values in the technological development process. International co-operation
grows out of shared values and informs design criteria and policy tools. But these design criteria must be
optimised, using a variety of tools and activities t hat can drive the embedding process. Forward -looking

===== PDF_PAGE 218 =====
216 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

TA both depends on and supports the expression of key values, which underpin the analysis of potential
benefits and harms, and the trajectories of emerging technology. Societal and stakeholder engagement
can bring a democratic element to the governance of emerging technology, enabling deliberation on the
values that should support and guide technological development. Finally, co -developed standards can
endow the governance system with the necessary adapti vity and utility as it sets a normative stance
towards technology through standards and guidelines. This framework will not define core human rights
and values, but it could clear the way for a more reflective stance towards emerging technologies and the
values they embody. As actioned through this pragmatic framework, this stance might ground a more co -
operative approach to developing technologies in, for and with societies.

References

Anthony, E., R. Lovell-Badge and S. Morrison (2021), “New guidelines for stem cell and embryo
research from the ISSCR”, Cell Stem Cell, Vol. 28/6, pp. 991-992,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2021.05.009.
[83]
Baik, E., A. Koshy and B. Hardy (2022), “Communicating CRISPR: Challenges and opportunities
in engaging the public”, in Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science,
Molecular Biology and Clinical Medicine in the Age of Politicization, Elsevier,
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pmbts.2021.11.004.
[68]
Baldwin, C. and C. Woodard (2009), The Architecture of Platforms: A Unified View, Edward
Elgar Publishing, https://doi.org/10.4337/9781849803311.00008.
[8]
Bauer, A., A. Bogner and D. Fuchs (2021), “Rethinking societal engagement under the heading
of Responsible Research and Innovation: (novel) requirements and challenges”, Journal of
Responsible Innovation, Vol. 8/3, pp. 342-363,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2021.1909812.
[75]
BEIS (2021), “The use of public engagement for technological innovation: literature review and
case studies”, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-use-of-public-engagement-for-technological-
innovation-literature-review-and-case-studies (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[63]
Black, J. (2008), “Constructing and contesting legitimacy and accountability in polycentric
regulatory regimes”, Regulation &amp; Governance, Vol. 2/2, pp. 137-164,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-5991.2008.00034.x.
[92]
Borrás, S. and J. Edler (2020), “The roles of the state in the governance of socio-technical
systems’ transformation”, Research Policy, Vol. 49/5, p. 103971,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.103971.
[46]
Capri, A. (2019), “Techno-Nationalism: What Is It And How Will It Change Global Commerce?”,
Forbes, https://www.forbes.com/sites/alexcapri/2019/12/20/techno-nationalism-what-is-it-and-
how-will-it-change-global-commerce/?sh=62458045710f (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[5]
Chilvers, J. and M. Kearnes (eds.) (2015), Remaking Participation, Routledge, Abingdon, Oxon ;
New York, NY : Routledge is an imprint, https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203797693.
[58]

===== PDF_PAGE 219 =====
 217
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Cong, L. et al. (2013), “Multiplex Genome Engineering Using CRISPR/Cas Systems”, Science,
Vol. 339/6121, pp. 819-823, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1231143.
[86]
Council of Europe (2019), Strategic Action Plan on Human Rights and Technologies in
Biomedicine (2020-2025), https://rm.coe.int/strategic-action-plan-final-e/1680a2c5d2
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[19]
Crespi, F. et al. (2021), “European Technological Sovereignty: An Emerging Framework for
Policy Strategy”, Intereconomics, Vol. 56/6, pp. 348-354, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10272-021-
1013-6.
[4]
de Silva, M. et al. (2022), “How did COVID-19 shape co-creation?: Insights and policy lessons
from international initiatives”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers,
No. 134, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/e11c5274-en.
[74]
Delvenne, P. and B. Rosskamp (2021), “Cosmopolitan technology assessment? Lessons
learned from attempts to address the deficit of technology assessment in Europe”, Journal of
Responsible Innovation, Vol. 8/3, pp. 445-470,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2021.1988433.
[39]
Diggans, J. and E. Leproust (2019), “Next Steps for Access to Safe, Secure DNA Synthesis”,
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Vol. 7,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2019.00086.
[87]
Dryzek, J. et al. (2020), “Global citizen deliberation on genome editing”, Science, Vol. 369/6510,
pp. 1435-1437, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb5931.
[94]
Engels, F., A. Wentland and S. Pfotenhauer (2019), “Testing future societies? Developing a
framework for test beds and living labs as instruments of innovation governance”, Research
Policy, Vol. 48/9, p. 103826, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103826.
[70]
Environmental Defense Fund (2021), “Innovative Foods: A Guide to Responsible Investment in
Cell-cultured Meat and Seafood”, No. accessed on 20 September 2022,
https://business.edf.org/files/InnovativeFoods-CellCulturedMeat-Brochure-LOWres-
092921.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[88]
Folke, C. et al. (2005), “ADAPTIVE GOVERNANCE OF SOCIAL-ECOLOGICAL SYSTEMS”,
Annual Review of Environment and Resources, Vol. 30/1, pp. 441-473,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.30.050504.144511.
[7]
GAO (2021), “Vaccine Development: Capabilities and Challenges for Addressing Infectious
Diseases”, U.S. Government Accountability Office, https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-22-
104371 (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[53]
GAO (2020), “Tracing the source of chemical weapons”, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-21-
271sp.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[52]
García, L. and D. Winickoff (2022), “Brain-computer interfaces and the governance
system: Upstream approaches”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers,
No. 2022/01, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/18d86753-en.
[80]
Guston, D. (2013), “Understanding ‘anticipatory governance’”, Social Studies of Science,
Vol. 44/2, pp. 218-242, https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312713508669.
[22]

===== PDF_PAGE 220 =====
218 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Gutierrez, C., G. Marchant and K. Michael (2021), “Effective and Trustworthy Implementation of
AI Soft Law Governance”, IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society, Vol. 2/4, pp. 168-
170, https://doi.org/10.1109/tts.2021.3121959.
[81]
Hagemann, R., J. Huddleston and A. Thierer (2019), “Soft Law for Hard Problems: The
Governance of Emerging Technologies in an Uncertain Future”, Colorado Technology Law
Journal, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3118539 (accessed on
7 March 2023).
[82]
Hasselman, L. (2016), “Adaptive management; adaptive co-management; adaptive governance:
what’s the difference?”, Australasian Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 24/1,
pp. 31-46, https://doi.org/10.1080/14486563.2016.1251857.
[9]
Hennen, L. (2012), “Why do we still need participatory technology assessment?”, Poiesis &amp;
Praxis, Vol. 9/1-2, pp. 27-41, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10202-012-0122-5.
[41]
Hernández, G. and M. Amaral (2022), “Case studies on agile regulatory governance to harness
innovation: Civilian drones and bio-solutions”, OECD Regulatory Policy Working Papers,
No. 18, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0fa5e0e6-en.
[77]
HM Government (2022), “Future Tech Forum Chair’s Report”,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/future-tech-forum-chairs-report/future-tech-
forum-chairs-report (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[13]
Iltis, A., S. Hoover and K. Matthews (2021), “Public and Stakeholder Engagement in Developing
Human Heritable Genome Editing Policies: What Does it Mean and What Should it Mean?”,
Frontiers in Political Science, Vol. 3, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2021.730869.
[71]
Jasanoff, S. (2007), Designs on Nature: Science and Democracy in Europe and the United
States, https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691130422/designs-on-nature
(accessed on 7 March 2023).
[56]
Jasanoff, S. (2003), , Minerva, Vol. 41/3, pp. 223-244, https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1025557512320. [59]
Jasanoff, S. and J. Hurlbut (2018), “A global observatory for gene editing”, Nature,
Vol. 555/7697, pp. 435-437, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-03270-w.
[93]
König, H., M. Baumann and C. Coenen (2021), “Emerging Technologies and Innovation—Hopes
for and Obstacles to Inclusive Societal Co-Construction”, Sustainability, Vol. 13/23, p. 13197,
https://doi.org/10.3390/su132313197.
[64]
Kreiling, L. and C. Paunov (2021), “Knowledge co-creation in the 21st century: A cross-country
experience-based policy report”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers,
No. 115, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/c067606f-en.
[31]
Kuhlmann, S. (2002), “Distributed Techno-Economic Intelligence for policymaking”,
https://www.urenio.org/e-innovation/stratinc/files/library/22.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[37]
Kuhlmann, S. et al. (1999), “Improving Distributed Intelligence in Complex Innovations Systems”,
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Improving-Distributed-Intelligence-in-Complex-
Kuhlmann-Boekholt/bacef7fa27b0942bce2aad3b0576cb3fa76e04ec (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[40]

===== PDF_PAGE 221 =====
 219
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Larrue, P. (2021), “The design and implementation of mission-oriented innovation policies: A
new systemic policy approach to address societal challenges”, OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Papers, No. 100, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/3f6c76a4-en.
[26]
Lindner, R. et al. (2021), “Mission-oriented innovation policy: From ambition to successful
implementation”, Perspectives - Policy Brief, No. No. 02 / 2021, Fraunhofer ISI, Karlsruhe,
https://www.isi.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/isi/dokumente/policy-briefs/policy_brief_mission-
oriented-innovation-policy.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[49]
Malina, D. (ed.) (2022), “Governance of Emerging Technologies in Health and Medicine —
Creating a New Framework”, New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 386/23, pp. 2239-2242,
https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmms2200907.
[27]
Marchant, G. and B. Allenby (2017), “Soft law: New tools for governing emerging technologies”,
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Vol. 73/2, pp. 108-114,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2017.1288447.
[34]
Marchant, G. and W. Wallach (2015), “Coordinating Technology Governance”, Issues in Science
and Technology 31, No. no. 4 (Summer 2015), https://issues.org/coordinating-technology-
governance/ (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[76]
Matasick, C., C. Alfonsi and A. Bellantoni (2020), “Governance responses to disinformation
: How open government principles can inform policy options”, OECD Working Papers on
Public Governance, No. 39, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/d6237c85-en.
[2]
Mathews, D. (2017), When emerging biomedical technologies converge or collide, Oxford
University Press, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198786832.003.0001.
[36]
Matschoss, K. et al. (2020), “Co-creating transdisciplinary global change research agendas in
Finland”, European Journal of Futures Research, Vol. 8/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40309-
020-0162-3.
[65]
Matthews, D. (2021), “US to push ‘democracy-affirming technology’ with prizes and research
projects”, Science Business, https://sciencebusiness.net/news/us-push-democracy-affirming-
technology-prizes-and-research-projects (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[90]
Mazzucato, M. (2018), Mission-oriented research & innovation in the European Union,
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/5b2811d1-16be-11e8-9253-
01aa75ed71a1/language-en (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[48]
National Institutes of Health (2021), Novel and Exceptional Technology and Research Advisory
Committee, Gene Drives in Biomedical Research Report, https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-
content/uploads/NExTRAC-Gene-Drives-Final-Report.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[42]
National Research Council (2014), Convergence, National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.,
https://doi.org/10.17226/18722.
[45]
OECD (2022), “Sustainability and Safe and Sustainable by Design: Working Descriptions for the
Safer”, OECD Environment, Health and Safety Publications Series on the Safety of
Manufactured Nanomaterials, No. No. 105,
https://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=ENV-CBC-
MONO(2022)30%20&doclanguage=en (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[89]

===== PDF_PAGE 222 =====
220 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

OECD (2022), Towards an anticipatory innovation governance model in Finland, https://oecd-
opsi.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Anticipatory-Innovation-Governance-in-Finland.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[21]
OECD (2021), “Practical Guidance on Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness Innovation”,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/public/doc/669/9110a3d9-3bab-48ca-9f1f-4ab6f2201ad9.pdf
(accessed on 6 March 2023).
[35]
OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness
Innovation, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0464 (accessed
on 5 March 2023).
[15]
OECD (2021), “Trust in Global Co-operation - the vision for the OECD for the next decade”,
https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=1110_1110970-giiac5g3aj&title=MCM-oct-2021-Trust-
in-global-co-operation-Mathias-Cormann (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[28]
OECD (2020), “Addressing societal challenges using transdisciplinary research” , OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 88, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/0ca0ca45-en.
[33]
OECD (2019), Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/oecd-legal-0449 (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[17]
OECD (2019), Recommendation of the Council on Responsible Innovation in Neurotechnology,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0457 (accessed on
6 March 2023).
[11]
OECD (2019), Regulatory effectiveness in the era of digitalisation,
https://www.oecd.org/gov/regulatory-policy/Regulatory-effectiveness-in-the-era-of-
digitalisation.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[78]
OECD (2018), OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2018: Adapting to
Technological and Societal Disruption, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2018-en.
[18]
OECD (2018), “Technology governance and the innovation process”, in OECD Science,
Technology and Innovation Outlook 2018: Adapting to Technological and Societal Disruption,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2018-15-en.
[6]
OECD (2016), “Public engagement in STI policy”, in OECD Science, Technology and Innovation
Outlook 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/sti_in_outlook-2016-11-en.
[61]
OECD (forthcoming), “Technology in and for society: innovating well for inclusive transitions -
conference report”.
[30]
Owen, R., R. von Schomberg and P. Macnaghten (2021), “An unfinished journey? Reflections on
a decade of responsible research and innovation”, Journal of Responsible Innovation,
Vol. 8/2, pp. 217-233, https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2021.1948789.
[25]
Pfotenhauer, S. et al. (2021), “Mobilizing the private sector for responsible innovation in
neurotechnology”, Nature Biotechnology, Vol. 39/6, pp. 661-664,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-00947-y.
[79]

===== PDF_PAGE 223 =====
 221
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Piller, F., C. Ihl and A. Vossen (2010), “A Typology of Customer Co-Creation in the Innovation
Process”, SSRN Electronic Journal, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1732127.
[72]
Rayna, T. and L. Striukova (2015), “Open innovation 2.0: is co-creation the ultimate challenge?”,
International Journal of Technology Management, Vol. 69/1, p. 38,
https://doi.org/10.1504/ijtm.2015.071030.
[73]
Robinson, D. and M. Mazzucato (2019), “The evolution of mission-oriented policies: Exploring
changing market creating policies in the US and European space sector”, Research Policy,
Vol. 48/4, pp. 936-948, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.005.
[47]
Robinson, D. et al. (2021), “Policy lensing of future-oriented strategic intelligence: An experiment
connecting foresight with decision making contexts”, Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, Vol. 169, p. 120803, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120803.
[38]
Roco, M. and W. Bainbridge (2013), “The new world of discovery, invention, and innovation:
convergence of knowledge, technology, and society”, Journal of Nanoparticle Research,
Vol. 15/9, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11051-013-1946-1.
[44]
Rodriguez-Calero, I. et al. (2020), “Prototyping strategies for stakeholder engagement during
front-end design: Design practitioners’ approaches in the medical device industry”, Design
Studies, Vol. 71, p. 100977, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2020.100977.
[69]
Ryan-Mosley, T. (2022), “The world is moving closer to a new cold war fought with authoritarian
tech”, MIT Technology Review, https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/09/22/1059823/cold-
war-authoritarian-tech-china-iran-sco/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[1]
Sambuli, N. (2021), “In my view: The promises, pitfalls and potential of global technology
governance”, in Development Co-operation Report 2021: Shaping a Just Digital
Transformation, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/67500f38-en.
[10]
Scheufele, D. et al. (2021), “What we know about effective public engagement on CRISPR and
beyond”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 118/22,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004835117.
[66]
Schroth, F. et al. (2020), “Participatory agenda setting as a process — of people, ambassadors
and translation: a case study of participatory agenda setting in rural areas”, European Journal
of Futures Research, Vol. 8/1, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40309-020-00165-w.
[67]
Shelley-Egan, C. et al. (2017), “Responsible Research and Innovation in the context of human
cognitive enhancement: some essential features”, Journal of Responsible Innovation,
Vol. 5/1, pp. 65-85, https://doi.org/10.1080/23299460.2017.1319034.
[24]
Stirling, A. (2007), ““Opening Up” and “Closing Down””, Science, Technology, &amp; Human
Values, Vol. 33/2, pp. 262-294, https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243907311265.
[60]
STOA (2021), Tackling deepfakes in European policy, Panel for the Future of Science and
Technology, https://www.rathenau.nl/sites/default/files/2021-
08/tackling_deepfakes_in_european_policy_STOA.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[50]
Sun, T. et al. (2022), “Challenges and recent progress in the governance of biosecurity risks in
the era of synthetic biology”, Journal of Biosafety and Biosecurity, Vol. 4/1, pp. 59-67,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobb.2022.02.002.
[84]

===== PDF_PAGE 224 =====
222 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Tech For Good Summit (2020), Tech For Good Summit - Progress Report,
https://www.elysee.fr/admin/upload/default/0001/08/23c18d41821bd9bb2505555892fcbc19d5
2a3b5d.pdf (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[12]
The Royal Society (2009), Geoengineering the climate: science, governance and uncertainty,
accessed on 30 November 2022, https://royalsociety.org/-
/media/Royal_Society_Content/policy/publications/2009/8693.pdf (accessed on
7 March 2023).
[95]
The White House (2022), “U.S. and U.K. Launch Innovation Prize Challenges in Privacy -
Enhancing Technologies to Tackle Financial Crime and Public Health Emergencies”, Press
release, https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2022/07/20/u-s-and-u-k-launch-
innovation-prize-challenges-in-privacy-enhancing-technologies-to-tackle-financial-crime-and-
public-health-emergencies/ (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[91]
The White House (2021), U.S. and U.K. Launch Innovation Prize Challenges in Privacy -
Enhancing Technologies to Tackle Financial Crime and Public Health Emergencies ,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/12/08/white-house-announces-launch-
of-the-international-grand-challenges-on-democracy-affirming-technologies-for-the-summit-
for-democracy/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[16]
The White House (2021), White House Announces Launch of the International Grand
Challenges on Democracy-Affirming Technologies for the Summit for Democracy,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/12/08/white-house-announces-launch-
of-the-international-grand-challenges-on-democracy-affirming-technologies-for-the-summit-
for-democracy/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[14]
Trump, B. et al. (eds.) (2020), Synthetic Biology 2020: Frontiers in Risk Analysis and
Governance, Springer International Publishing, Cham, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
27264-7.
[85]
Tuebke, A. et al. (2001), Strategic Policy Intelligence: Current Trends, the State of Play and
Perspectives,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308900288_Strategic_Policy_Intelligence_Current_
Trends_the_State_of_Play_and_Perspectives (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[43]
UK Ministry of Defence (2021), Human Augmentation – the Dawn of a New Paradigm, accessed
on 30 November 2022, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/human-augmentation-
the-dawn-of-a-new-paradigm (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[96]
US State Department (2020), U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council (TTC),
https://www.state.gov/u-s-eu-trade-and-technology-council-ttc/ (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[20]
van Boheemen, P. et al. (2020), Guidelines for foresight-based policy analysis,
https://www.rathenau.nl/sites/default/files/2020-
07/REPORT%20Cyber%20resilience%20with%20new%20technology%20 -
%20Rathenau%20Instituut.pdf (accessed on 7 March 2023).
[51]
Van Woensel, L. (2021), Guidelines for foresight-based policy analysis, STOA,
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/39319.
[54]
Van Woensel, L. (2020), A Bias Radar for Responsible Policy-Making, Springer International
Publishing, Cham, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32126-0.
[55]

===== PDF_PAGE 225 =====
 223
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

von Schomberg, R. (2013), “A Vision of Responsible Research and Innovation”, in Responsible
Innovation, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118551424.ch3.
[23]
Wee, S. (2021), “Two Scientific Journals Retract Articles Involving Chinese DNA Research”, The
New York Times, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/09/business/china-dna-retraction-
uyghurs.html (accessed on 6 March 2023).
[3]
Winickoff, D. et al. (2021), “Collaborative platforms for emerging technology: Creating
convergence spaces”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers, No. 109,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ed1e030d-en.
[32]
Worthington, R. (1982), “The Social Control of Technology. By David Collingridge. (New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1980. Pp. i + 200. $22.50.)”, American Political Science Review, Vol. 76/1,
pp. 134-135, https://doi.org/10.2307/1960465.
[29]
Wynne, B. (2006), “Public Engagement as a Means of Restoring Public Trust in Science – Hitting
the Notes, but Missing the Music?”, Public Health Genomics, Vol. 9/3, pp. 211-220,
https://doi.org/10.1159/000092659.
[62]
Wynne, B. (1991), “Knowledges in Context”, Science, Technology, &amp; Human Values,
Vol. 16/1, pp. 111-121, https://doi.org/10.1177/016224399101600108.
[57]

===== PDF_PAGE 226 =====
224 
OECD SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION OUTLOOK 2023 © OECD 2023

Notes
1 The Office for Technology Assessment was formally created in 1972 and closed in 1995.
2 In 1994, NOTA was renamed the Rathenau Institute (www.rathenau.nl).
3 The agenda can be found at the following link (in Portuguese):
https://www.fct.pt/agendastematicas/docs/Agenda_Industria_Manufatura_Final.pdf (accessed
30 September 2022).
4 Further information on the German Initiative “IdeenLauf” (in German) available at:
https://www.wissenschaftsjahr.de/2022/ideenlauf (accessed 24 November /2022).
5 https://ebrains.eu/ (accessed 22 September 2022).
6 Further information on Nanocrafter ( https://citizensciencegames.com/nanocrafter-playing-game-
synthetic-biology/) or iGem online (https://igem.org/) (both accessed 24 September 2022).
7 https://www.digitalskillup.eu/ (accessed 22 September 2022).
8 https://www.aaas.org/programs/science-technology-policy-fellowships (accessed 22 September 2022).
9 Further information on the BMBF citizen science funding programme on STIP Compass online:
https://stip.oecd.org/stip/interactive-dashboards/policy-
initiatives/2019%2Fdata%2FpolicyInitiatives%2F24328 (accessed 30 November 2022).
10 Lorraine Fab Living Lab: https://lf2l.fr/ (accessed 24 September 2022).
11 https://tekno.dk/project/sockets/?lang=en) (accessed 25 November 2022).
12 https://www.iso.org/standard/67446.html?browse=tc (accessed 22 September 2022)
13 https://www.ifpma.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/IFPMA_Code_of_Practice_2019-1.pdf (accessed
23 September 2022).
14 The UK Royal Society provided one authoritative definition of “geoengineering” in 2009 : “the deliberate
large-scale manipulation of the planetary environment to counteract anthropogenic climate c hange” (The
Royal Society, 2009[95]).
15 The UK Ministry of Defence has proposed a definition of “human augmentation” as “the application of
science and technologies to temporarily or permanently improve human performance”, and divides the
field further into “human performance optimisation and human performance enhancement” (UK Ministry of
Defence, 2021[96]).
16 http://wwviews.org/the-world-wide-views-method/ (accessed 04 October 2022).

===== PDF_PAGE 227 =====
OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook
2023
ENABLING TRANSITIONS IN TIMES OF DISRUPTION
Sociotechnical systems in areas like energy, agrifood and mobility need to transform rapidly to become more
sustainable and resilient. Science, technology and innovation (STI) have essential roles in these transformations,
but governments must be more ambitious and act with greater urgency in their STI policies to meet these
challenges. They should design policy portfolios that enable transformative innovation and new markets
to emerge, challenge existing fossil‑based systems, and create windows of opportunity for low‑carbon
technologies to break through. This calls for larger investments but also greater directionality in research
and innovation, for example, through mission‑oriented policies, to help direct and compress the innovation
cycle for low‑carbon technologies. International co‑operation will be essential, but rising geopolitical tensions,
including strategic competition in key emerging technologies, could make this difficult. OECD Science,
Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023 explores these and other key issues and trends that present STI with
a new operating environment to which it must adapt.
9HSTCQE*ehbiha+
PRINT ISBN 978-92-64-47187-0
PDF ISBN 978-92-64-42238-4
OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 2023 ENABLING TRANSITIONS IN TIMES OF DISRUPTION
